          

 
Algorithms told me to buy it
   To what extent do Amazon's recommendations influence the choice of its customers?
 
 
 
 


Student Name:        Mihael Gelo
   Student Number:    512149
 
   Supervisor:   		João Gonçalves, MSc.
 
   
   Master Media Studies. Media & Creative Industries
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication 
   Erasmus University Rotterdam, The Netherlands
 
 

   Master Thesis  
   June 27th, 2019












Table of contents

1. Introduction.........................................................................p. 1 

2. Theoretical framework............................................................p. 3 
   2.1. Recommender systems........................................................p. 3
   2.1.1. Content based and collaborative filtering...........................p. 4
   2.1.2. Amazon's technique - the item based collaborative filtering...p. 4
   2.2. Decision making process....................................................p. 6
   2.2.1. Consideration set.......................................................p. 6
   2.2.2. Influences on consideration set......................................p. 8
   2.3. Persuasion process...............................................................p. 10
		2.3.1. Elaboration likelihood model.........................................p. 11
		2.3.2. Persuasion knowledge model........................................p. 13
	3.3. Theory overview...............................................................p. 14
		3.3.1. The outline of the theoretical framework...........................p. 14
		3.3.2. Hypotheses.............................................................p. 15

3. Methodology.........................................................................p. 17
   3.1. Choice of method..............................................................p. 17
   3.2. Data collection................................................................p. 18
   3.3. Operationalization.............................................................p. 20
   3.3.1. Operationalization of Influences....................................p. 21
   3.3.2. Factor analysis of Influences.........................................p. 22
   3.3.3. Operationalization of Persuasion.....................................p. 25
   3.3.4. Factor analysis of Persuasion.........................................p. 26
   3.4. Methodology overview.............................................................p. 28
   
4. Results....................................................................................p. 29
   4.1. Influences.......................................................................p. 29
   4.2. Persuasion.......................................................................p. 31
   4.3. Findings and discussion......................................................p. 33
   4.3.1. Influences................................................................p. 33
   4.3.2. Persuasion...............................................................p 34

5. Conclusion...............................................................................p. 35
   5.1. Reflection on the conducted research......................................p. 35
   5.2. Implications for marketers and consumers................................p. 36
   5.3. Limitations and suggestions for further research........................p. 37

6. References...............................................................................p. 39

7. Appendix - Survey..................................................................p. 44

1. Introduction

   E-commerce is becoming a booming form of retail business in the 21st century and is expected to further grow in the upcoming decade. According to the statistical data, the global e-commerce retail sales are marking continuous annual rise, the revenue of which being at $1.3 trillion (US dollars) in 2014. climbed up to $2.3 trillion in 2017. Furthermore, it is projected that this sum will reach annual revenue of $4.9 trillion in the year of 2021 (Statista, 2019). While the current trend captured by the data in this report is that business to business e-retail accounts for more sales than business to consumer e-retail, ordering products online and getting them delivered to their homes is arguably a luxury to which people are getting adjusted and are actively incorporating this routine into their daily lives. Based on the stated financial projections, this trend of online purchase of products and services by consumers will soon only increase in scope, creating a new society of buyers in which online shopping will be the new normal for all sorts of purchases.
   Regarding this new society, there is an important issue to be addressed, the one concerning certain new influences on the choices of the consumers when shopping on the online platforms. In the e-retail environment, just like during the physical shopping that occurs in the retail stores, consumers' choice among many possible brands in the given category of products is affected by the previous influences such as friends' advice, online reviews, value of products, marketing communication, media and others. However, in the e-retail platforms, there is an additional influence on the choice of the consumer- algorithmic recommendations on the platform. The recommender systems of e-retail platforms are put in place to gather the data from the users, with the aim of precise algorithmic predictions regarding what these users may like in products and subsequent targeting of users with the recommendations of these products (Lü et al., 2012, p. 2).
    With the growth of the e-retail in the following years and the focus of the major platforms on big data management, the importance should be given to these recommender systems and to the role that they play as the influencers of choice. Measuring the influence that they have on the consumers' decisions should enable the scientific community to understand current trends regarding the (lack of) critical assessment of these systems by the consumers. If the influence is high and the consumers indeed significantly rely on recommendations, this may open the door for the discussion about the implications regarding the diversity of choice and the possibilities of brands' influence on the e-retail stores in order to manipulate the results. 
   Previous research, as it will be discussed later on, has already put some focus on the recommender systems and how people react to them (Adomavicius, Bockstedt, Curley and Zang, 2017; Logg, Minson and Moore, 2019; Senecal & Nantel, 2004), but no exploration which would focus specifically on a major significant e-retail platform was performed. Therefore, it is the aim of this thesis to explore the given and produce findings that will contribute to the scientific research and potentially open some new research paths. Following this discussion, Amazon was chosen as a suitable object of exploration. According to the statistical data, this e-commerce giant is the world's most valuable brand with the estimated value of $188 billion (Statista, 2019) and is projected to account for 50 percent of the entire US e-commerce retail market by 2021 (Statista, 2019). Amazon is therefore a significant e-retail platform that deserves to be an object of the upcoming exploration.
   The above presented arguments lead to the following research question of this thesis to emerge:

To what extent do recommender systems influence the purchase choice of Amazon's customers?

   Furthermore, to narrow this question, two aspects of the influence process are identified as important to explore. First, to measure the significance of Amazon's recommendations, their influence can be compared with other significant influences that affect Amazon's customers' purchase choice. Secondly, to delve deeper into the dynamics of the influencing process, it is important to introduce the phenomenon of persuasion into the research. In that sense, the significance of Amazon's recommendations influence can be evaluated by exploring whether those users who are more skeptical when confronted with recommendations and who understand Amazon's persuasion attempts will still significantly follow Amazon's recommendations while purchasing. The two sub questions for this research are therefore the following:
    
1. How do Amazon's recommendations as an influence compare with other influences in affecting the purchase decisions of Amazon's customers?
2. To what extent Amazon's recommendations' influence differ depending on the users' persuasion knowledge and their degree of the elaboration of recommendations?
2. Theoretical framework

    In order to conceptualize influences and persuasion to answer the stated sub-questions of the research, the theoretical framework with the concepts addressing these phenomena needed to be found and incorporated in this research, serving as a backbone for the upcoming exploration. Before presenting these, however, the following chapter serves for brief presentation of recommender systems, the aim of it being the exploration of the logic behind their operating process.

2.1 Recommender systems
    At the time of the writing of this thesis, Amazon was using the recommender system based on the item-based (also called item-to-item) collaborative filtering. While the special emphasis of this chapter will be put on this technique since it is the one that interests this research the most, it is nevertheless important to start by introducing the recommender systems and their operating logic in general.
    Recommender systems are used by the online platforms to predict user's future likes and interests regarding the products and services based on the currently available data about users and their preferences (Lü et al., 2012, p. 2). Being mostly applied to e-commerce web sites, these systems are useful in tackling the issue of information overload, which may prove overwhelming for users of the certain website (Symeonidis, Ntempos & Manolopoulos, 2014, p. 7) as they have too many options to choose from. As explained by Symeonidis et al. (2014, p. 7), when generally faced with some problem, a person often relies on suggestions of those who have more experience regarding the given issue. In the case of an online environment, however, there are numerous possible suggestions which make it rather difficult for user to assess trustworthy ones from those that aren't. Therefore, the recommendation process in the online environment can be shifted from individual suggestions to collective logic, which is what recommendation algorithms do. As explained by Aggarwal, Tomar and Kathuria (2017, p. 65), these systems are beneficial to service providers, as well as to the users. On one hand, they reduce users' costs of transactions regarding the process of finding and selecting the items during the online shopping. On the other, they serve to service providers as tool for selling more products and increasing the e-commerce revenue as they influence and improve the decision-making process of users.
    There are two main techniques for generation of recommendations that the platforms use - content-based filtering and collaborative filtering.
    
    2.1.1 Content-based and Collaborative filtering
    In the content-based filtering, the recommendation of some item to the user is based on those content characteristics gathered from the items (such as products or media content) that were previously evaluated by that user. Namely, those items that are mostly related to the user's previously positively evaluated items are then recommended to that user (Isinkaye, Folajimi & Ojokoh, 2015, p. 264). To determine these positively evaluated items, the systems rely on the marked preferences which are voluntarily entered by user during sign-up into the given platform or they simply observe user's choice of items (Kembellec, Chartron & Saleh, 2014, p. 7).
    While this technique uses similarity of content to produce recommendation, the next major technique- collaborative filtering, uses similarity of user profiles on the given platform to predict the content that could be most interesting to each user. The operating logic of collaborative filtering is therefore that "people who agreed in their evaluation of certain items in the past are likely to agree again in the future" (Aggarwal et al., 2017, p. 66). Furthermore, collaborative filtering is divided into two sub-techniques of filtering, the first one being the user-based collaborative filtering in which artificial intelligence groups user profiles on the platform based on the common items that they have positively evaluated in the past. Algorithms then look observe this newly formed group and look at other items that every individual in the group had previously positively evaluated. Algorithms than take all these items from profiles of individual users and send them as recommendations to the other users from the group who didn't interact with them yet. (Aggarwal et al., 2017). 
     Amazon, however, uses the second major collaborative technique- item-based filtering, which will be explained in the separate sub-chapter, as follows.

2.1.2 Amazon's technique- the item-based collaborative filtering
    The item-based filtering technique was invented by Amazon.com in 1998 as a new method of collaborative filtering and as a replacement for the user-based technique (United States Patent, 1998). This new Amazon's technique proved to be rather influential, being adopted by the significant tech companies such as media giants Netflix and YouTube in the years following its introduction (Smith & Linden, 2017, p. 13). The incentive for creation of the item-based technique was due to the flaws of the user-based technique regarding their lack of sparsity and scalability. As explained by Sarwar, Karypis, Konstan and Riedl (2001, p. 287), many commercial platforms want recommender systems to evaluate larger sets of items (such as containing books or movies) where even the most active users realistically purchase less than 1% of the entire store's offer. In such settings, the previously explained user-based collaborative filtering may produce poor recommendations to the users, since the quantitative imbalance of offered and purchased (positively evaluated) content on the platform may result in inadequate groupings of user profiles. In addition to this argument, another issue with the user-based approach concerns the inability of its algorithm's computing to cope with the potential increase in number of both the users and the items on the given platform. 
    Therefore, instead of matching similar user profiles like user-based collaborative filtering would do, the item-based collaborative filtering matches positively evaluated user's items with similar items that are available on the platform. These similar items are then combined into lists which are sent as recommendations to each user. But unlike the content-based filtering which focuses only on previously evaluated content to produce similarity, the similarity between the two items in the item-based filtering is calculated by special formulas in which algorithms measure similarity index when they observe that some items are often being purchased together (Linden, Smith & York, 2003, p. 78). For instance, the person who orders a toothbrush on Amazon may get the recommendations for products such as toothpaste as algorithms measured the high similarity between these items due to the fact that many users purchased them together.
    Now that the function of these algorithms is clearer, hopefully it is easier to deconstruct the meaning of their influence on the Amazon's buyers and to understand how these recommendations are set to influence the users by entering their consideration process. However, rather than being alone in this cognitive consideration set, they compete with other influences to remain there all the way until the purchase decision.



2.2 Decision-making process
    While buying a certain product, there are many elements that may affect the final decision of a consumer regarding which brand it will choose. In this section, the aim is to specify these influences and categorize them logically, so that the clear structure of the influences can emerge and that it becomes feasible to identify what kind of proportion of this set is influenced by Amazon's recommender systems. 
    But before identifying these influences on the consumers, the theoretical concept of consideration set should be explained as it decreases the level of abstraction regarding what is it that leads to the consumer's choice.
    
    
    2.2.1 Consideration set
    Every purchase on Amazon is preceded by a certain psychological journey, characteristics of which vary from user to user. Before making a purchase, some users may want to make an extensive research regarding the brand and the product, while others may behave more impulsively. Some may be influenced by their family or peers when choosing a brand, why others may focus predominantly on price and quality aspects. There are even users who may come to the website not being prepared to buy a certain product, but then shifting their focus from the ones that they were originally planned to buy. 
	All these variables and their combinations shape person's consideration set - the cognitive frame in which external information and influences form a consumer's opinion or lead to an impulse, either of which finally culminates as a purchase decision (Shocker, Ben-Akiva, Boccara & Nedungadi, 1991; Brown & Wildt, 1992). 
    In the model of individual choice (Shocker et al., 1991, p. 182) suggest that the formation of the consideration set is one of the natural steps in the consumer's cognitive process of filtering all the possible information about purchase alternatives. In this sense, consideration set is the result of the narrowing of what is first the universal set (all possible options of purchase that individual could possibly encounter) and then the awareness set (all items that the person is aware of, whether they are stored in the long-term memory or are introduced immediately before the purchase). Based on this insight, it can therefore be concluded that the origins of items in person's awareness set may range from the brand advertisements seen years ago and stored deep in the memory to the recommendations of Amazon.com seen less than a minute prior to the purchase. As pointed in the model, the awareness set evolves into a consideration set and it happens under the process of a purposeful construction. This means that the individual may have knowledge about many alternatives but uses only those which come to mind as relevant for a certain purpose such as acquiring a new product. The core characteristic of consideration set is that it is a dynamic place, meaning that here the person evaluates, adds and deletes purchasing options within working memory, eventually guiding itself up to the final decision. This very dynamic is the reason why the authors of the model also add the choice set as the one last funnel between the consideration set and final purchase decision: it is stated that the choice set is the extension of consideration set which consists of the smaller number of highly differentiated alternatives (Shocker et al., 1991, p. 183). However, authors note that the choice set can be observed as an inclusive part of the consideration set and that ultimately it is not necessary to separate the two.
    Due to its sophisticated explanation of the decision-making process using concepts of universal set, awareness set and consideration set, the depicted model of individual choice was presented here so extensively. As for its acceptance within the scientific community, many  authors have studied it and referred to it (Brown & Wildt, 1992; Eliaz & Spiegler, 2011; Hauser, 2014; Roberts and Lattin, 1991; Vroomen, Franses & Nierop, 2004) using it either as template for research or building additional theory on it or both. One additional explanation of consideration set is that it consists of brands that the consumer is willing to buy or would consider buying, considers them acceptable to purchase or did so the last time it was purchasing a product, or if it actually more actively considered to buy them the last time it was purchasing a product (Brown & Wildt, 1992, p. 238).
    As for the expansion of the theoretical concept of consideration set, Roberts and Lattin (1991) most notably contributed with their model of criteria for brand's entry into the consideration set of a consumer. Using mathematical backbone, they explained that the entry of the brand into the consideration set is a result of a trade-off between perceived brand's utility and the mental storage and processing costs of the consumer. Essentially, they suggest, consideration is a consumer's cost-benefit evaluation. The benefit here is expressed in the maximum expected utility regarding the choice from the set, while the cost is determined by total cost of maintaining the consideration set, including the consumer's cost of search as well as the cost of mental processing and storage (Roberts & Lattin, 1991, p 431). Another notable model that uses consideration set as the theoretical backbone is the model of consumer behavior where the consideration set is described as the result of  both deliberate and unconscious screening process, used by consumers to reduce quantity of relevant alternatives (Eliaz & Spiegel, 2011, p.235). This last model is of particular use as it transcends static explanations of consideration set, introducing the marketing variable and examining the influence process, where marketers attempt to exploit the unconscious aspects of consumer's consideration set. As such, the model serves as adequate theoretical bridge between the phenomenon of decision-making and the phenomenon of persuasion. It will be further assessed in the Persuasion chapter of this thesis. 
    Hopefully, the argumentation and theoretical framework presented above proved successful in decreasing the level of abstraction as to what is meant by consumer's choice. Now it should become clearer that by assessing To what extent Amazon's recommender systems influence the choice of its customers, what is being observed is the significance of these recommendations' impact on consideration set and how they compare to the other influences in this set. 

    2.2.2 Influences 
    Other than the recommendations on the website, the influences on the consideration set of Amazon's users are seemingly countless as there are many variables that can affect the customers and lead them to the purchase decision. However, by delving into existing theories and findings from previous research, it is the aim of this subchapter to identify and frame certain notable categories of influences and label them. This way, by establishing legitimate influences they can be used in this research as comparators with the influence of Amazon's recommendations.
    Naturally, the first influence category that was established for this research is Amazon's recommendations. Previous research already indicates that the online buyers put high amount of trust and follow recommendations when faced with the purchase decision. For instance, in the research of Senecal and Nantel (2004) performed on the online shoppers, it was established that "the recommender system was found to be the most inﬂuential recommendation source even if it was perceived as possessing less expertise than human experts and as being less trustworthy than other consumers" (Senecal & Nantel, 2004, p. 167). Recently, Logg, Minson and Moore (2019) came to the similar conclusion, further stressing about the trend of algorithmic appreciation and people's trust in recommender systems in the second decade of the 21st century. Furthermore, the experimental research performed by Adomavicius, Bockstedt, Curley and Zang (2017) on economic behavior of online consumers when purchasing songs also concluded about the importance of this influence. It showed that recommender systems positively affect the consumers' willingness to pay for the product, further demonstrating in experiment that this effect existed even when the recommendations contained significant errors. 
    Second category of influence that will be used in this research was labeled Word of mouth. This category includes both impact of offline word-of-mouth and electronic word-of-mouth on purchase decision, meaning that it encompasses influences such as friends, as well as online critics' and costumers' reviews. It has been established so far that online customers tend to rely on other people's comments and opinions before making a decision, finding them a valuable source of information during the decision-making process (Ahmad, Vveinhardt & Ahmed, 2014, p. 402; Katawetawaraks & Wang, 2011; Lackermair, Kailer & Kanmaz, 2013). Furthermore, Shang, Pei and Jin (2017) found that the decision-making process can be influenced by social risk factor, meaning that the products or brands that are likely to cause disapproval from family and friends may inhibit purchase decision of the consumers. 
    Third relevant influence category for this research was labeled Marketing communication. Since global spending on advertising is constantly on the rise and is projected to account for  $563.02 billion in 2019 (Statista, 2019), it is reasonable to expect that such significant expenditure is backed by empirical evidence of advertising's impact on consumer choice. Indeed, it is established that ads and branding strategies have impact on consumer's preference of brands in sectors such as luxury goods (Shukla, 2010), food industry (Ayanwale, Alimi & Ayanbimipe, 2005), telecommunications (Abideen & Saleem, 2011) and regarding health products (Pechmann & Catlin, 2016) as well as in general - backed by the more comprehensive research on advertising (Haider & Shakib, 2018; Kumar & Raju, 2013). 
   Finally, fourth established category of influence for this research was labeled Perceived value. This influence can also be described as price-quality ratio of the product or brand, meaning that the consumers assess what quality they get for the price that they pay. Previous research has showed that as the price of the product increases, the purchase decisions will generally decrease, but perceived quality of the product and brand may, nevertheless, compensate for the high price and result in the purchase decision (Albari & Safitri, 2018; Awan & Fatima, 2014; Beneke, Flynn, Greig & Mukaiwa, 2013).
   Following the argumentation from within this chapter, four categories of influences on consumer's consideration set are established and will be further used in the operationalization of the thesis. These are:
1. Amazon's recommendations (personalized recommendations on Amazon.com)
2. Word of mouth (friends' opinion, critics' reviews, consumers' reviews)
3. Marketing communication (advertising and branding messages)
4. Perceived value (price-quality ratio)



2.3 Persuasion 
    Previously explained consideration set can be observed as a cognitive bubble that appears when the consumer initiates the decision-making process and is making a purchase choice. As this bubble appears, multiple experiences and messages that the consumer is experiencing at the given moment or have experienced in the past are activated in its brain and will eventually lead them to the purchase decision. These pieces of information are sent by multiple influences, the important of which were identified in the previous chapter.
    However, in order to go further and assess the dynamic of the relationship between Amazon as a marketer and its user as a consumer, this chapters' aim is to explain the concept of persuasion. In the already mentioned model of consumer behavior (Eliaz & Spiegler, 2011), it is argued that the role of marketing is to overcome the consumer's resistance to new alternatives which result from the fact that the consumer will not perceive every available option as a relevant one for its consumption need. To overcome this problem (and enter the consideration set), marketers initiate persuasion attempts.
    The goal of this chapter is to assess this persuasion as a certain phenomenon that occurs between the agent and the target. Since both these actors play an active role in the process of persuasion- agent as the one who initiates persuasion and target as the one who copes with persuasion, both of their actions have effect on the persuasion outcome. The two models that will be used to explain this are Elaboration likelihood model and Persuasion knowledge model.
    
    2.3.1 Elaboration likelihood model
    Elaboration likelihood model (ELM) created by Petty and Cacioppo (1986) seeks to explain the process of person's elaboration of information when they receive persuasive messages, focusing on how likely it is that the person will engage in active thinking about the message. The model does so by arguing about the existence of two possible cognitive routes through which this processing can occur (Tam & Ho, 2005, p. 274) - the central and the peripheral route, the engagement of which is determined by consumers' motivation and ability (Petty and Cacioppo, 1986, p. 129). 
    In this sense, motivation can be explained as the result of the amount of the involvement of consumer when they are being stimulated by a certain marketing message. High involvement occurs when the recipient is aroused by the information, strategy-limited low involvement is what happens when the recipient pays attention to non-brand advertising such as music, and attention-limited low involvement presumes lack of attention regarding the communicated message (Andrews, 1988, p.219). Therefore, low involvement is manifested in low motivation, and vice versa. The ability, second determinant of processing route can be explained as set of person's knowledge and past experiences regarding the communicated issue. If the person has in its past engaged considerably in thinking about the issue and already possesses major cognitive structure of preexisting information, this will certainly be useful for evaluation of new information, and should lead to high ability to elaborate the message (Petty & Cacioppo, 1981, p. 853).
    Given all the stated, the persuasion process goes as follows: the central route of information processing is engaged if the message recipient has the high motivation and the ability to critically assess the received message and make more mindful effort to scrutinize all information relevant to the message. On the other hand, the recipients will engage in peripheral processing if they lack motivation or ability to process the detailed information, as they will rather rely on simple cues and make inferences based on the rule of the thumb (Petty & Cacioppo, 1986; Tam & Ho, 2005). Consequently, while the central route processing leads to formation of stronger, less volatile attitudes, those attitudes that are produced under the peripheral route aren't as accessible, persistent and resistant, nor can predict the behavior as successfully (Morris, Woo & Singh, 2005, p. 84). In each case, whichever variable (influencer) initiates a persuasion attempt on the consumer, it will result in one of the following three: the variable will serve to the consumer either as a persuasive argument, as a peripheral cue, or it will lead to the questioning of the argument (Petty & Cacioppo, 1986, p. 192). 
	Despite getting some criticism such as for not emphasizing consumer's emotions but rather focusing solely on cognitive aspects (Morris, Woo & Singh, 2005, p. 84) as well as  for not establishing more clearly the determinants of processing routes (Andrews, 1988), Elaboration likelihood model is possibly the most significant piece of theory regarding the phenomenon of persuasion. The model was used as a backbone of numerous researches examining persuasion in topics as diverse as restrained eating (Boyce & Kuijer, 2014), internet recruitment (Gregory, Meade & Thompson, 2013), communication about food risks (Frewer, Howard, Hedderley & Shepherd, 1997), social influence in counseling (McNeill & Stoltenberg, 1989) and others. More interestingly for the topic of this thesis, research incorporating Elaboration likelihood model was also performed in the online environment regarding themes such as web personalization (Tam & Ho, 2005), online shopping (Yang, 2015) and website design (Cyr, Head, Lim & Stibe, 2018). 
    Regarding this, one important finding from the previous research on Elaboration likelihood model is that in the online context, both central and peripheral route are engaged since a peripheral cue, for instance, appearance of the website, can also cause high involvement of the individual (San Jose-Cabezudo, Gutierrez-Arranz & Gutierrez-Cillan, 2009, p. 305). 
	To apply this specifically to online recommendations, Tam and Ho, also using Elaboration likelihood model, suggest that the recipient of the persuasive message may invoke the rule that the personalized recommendations are tailored for them and therefore can be trusted  (2005, p. 275) which is precisely the characteristic of peripheral processing route. However, the authors also argue that the content quality of the message's arguments is the variable that engages central processing route. 
    Applying this logic to Amazon's recommender systems, the fact that they are personalized for each user may equally be observed as the persuasion type which triggers the peripheral route, meaning that it requires low elaboration, while the content of the information itself goes through the central route, meaning that it requires high elaboration. In order to address this theoretical concept in the case of Amazon, this thesis sets itself a task to explore the correlation of the amount of elaboration of Amazon's recommendations by its users and their influence on these users. 
 
    
    2.3.2 Persuasion knowledge model
    In the theoretical section of this thesis, this special chapter on persuasion was introduced with the aim of clarifying the activity of influencing the consideration set of the consumer. While it is evaluated that the elaboration likelihood model is a strong basis for explaining this, another model of persuasion will be evaluated as it provides a bit different view on the process of persuasion and should therefore supplement the elaboration likelihood model.
    Persuasion knowledge model (Friestad & Wright, 1994) seeks to explain how recipients cope with persuasive attempts. As such, it puts primary focus on the recipient's knowledge and awareness about the persuasion techniques as a variable that decides whether the sender's persuasion messages will produce wanted effect or not. Based on this model, the persuasion can be described as a conflict between the agent and the persuasion target in which they both possess certain persuasion knowledge. The agent's persuasion knowledge consists of the knowledge about the topic of persuasion and of the knowledge about the target's coping mechanisms, while the target's persuasion knowledge consists reciprocally of its own knowledge about the topic of persuasion, as well as of the knowledge about agent's persuasive techniques, based on the previous experience. The authors' arguments (Friestad & Wright, 1994, p. 8) further suggest that the outcome of a persuasive episode significantly depends on the persuasive competence, which is the value that the targets give to the agents based on agents' persuasive techniques. The persuasion competence consists of targets' perceived effectiveness of the agents (i.e. - do they provide psychological effects that strongly affect buying decisions), and of the targets' perceived appropriateness of the agents (i.e. - whether the persuasive techniques are normatively acceptable and moral). Furthermore, through certain research efforts, some conclusions were made regarding the influence categories that were introduced in the previous chapter, and that are relevant for this thesis. Regarding the perceived value as assessed by the consumer, which is essentially an evaluation of product's price and quality balance, Hardesty, Bearden and Carlson (2006, p. 6) established that the lower persuasion knowledge of the consumer correlates with the chances of that consumer being "more susceptible to surcharge" during the persuasive episode. As for the advertisements as an influence, research of Tutaj and Reijmersdal (2012) shows that the persuasion knowledge varies depending on whether the advertising content is subtle (such as sponsored articles) or prominent (such as banners) as well as that the consumers find the former as more informative and interesting, while the latter annoying and irritated. Tutaj and Reijmersdal therefore conclude (2012, p. 15) that the higher the persuasion knowledge of the consumer for the ad is, the higher is its skepticism as well as its irritation by the ad.
    Along with the elaboration likelihood model, the persuasion knowledge model provides a solid theoretical backbone for this research, as it decreases the level of abstraction regarding the concept of persuasion. Furthermore, it serves as the base for introducing certain variables in the research. It points to the questions regarding the assessment of the artificial intelligence by the consumers on Amazon.com, such as the sub-question which is interested to know whether the person's knowledge of artificial intelligence affect how likely they are to follow algorithmic recommendations. This will be further assessed in the continuation of the thesis.

2.4 Theory overview
    Now that all the theoretical concepts are explained in their respective chapters and subchapters, it seems useful to present the big picture by outlining the backbone of this thesis and identifying what is being researched. This will be done in the following subchapter.

    2.4.1 The outline of the theoretical framework
    Prior to every purchase on the Amazon, the consumer is faced with the decision-making process in which they both consciously and unconsciously evaluate between various purchasing alternatives regarding brands and products. All the known alternatives to the consumer that it didn't categorically exclude from the purchase possibilities enter its consideration set - the consumer's cognitive bubble that is that is active from the initiation of the decision-making process up to the purchase choice. 
    The consideration set can be extremely dynamic, as various external influences compete to inject their agendas regarding positive reaction towards certain brands and products into it and influence the purchase decision. Notable of these influences are word of mouth, marketing communication, perceived value and, for the purposes of this thesis - Amazon's recommendations. The role of the mentioned influences, (especially the ones related to sales and marketing efforts) is to persuade the consumer to open the consideration set and let their agendas inside, and to keep them there all the way until the purchase decision. 
    The consumer will respond to these persuasion attempts by assessing the received information through central processing route if they are motivated and have cognitive ability to do so, or through the peripheral processing route if they lack the motivation and ability. In the case of online recommendations, consumer will use both routes to assess different pieces of information. Central route will be used to evaluate the content and argument of the recommendation, while the peripheral route will be used as a cue that the recommendation was tailored for that specific user, and therefore is legitimate. Furthermore, the persuasion attempt can be observed as a process that takes place between the agent of persuasion and the target of persuasion, whereas both are equally aware of the persuasion that is taking place and are actively participating. This means that the success of the persuasion depends on whether the target evaluates that the agent is efficient in providing the rationale for the purchase of a product, as well as that the agent's techniques are morally and normatively appropriate.
    Based on the presented, the aim of this thesis is to explore to what extent are Amazon's item-to-item recommendations successful as influencers in the consideration sets of the consumers based on what we know about their persuasive nature. To explore this, Amazon's recommendations' influence will be compared to other influences that have proved to be successful persuaders - already defined Amazon's recommendations, word of mouth, marketing communication and perceived value.

    2.4.2 Hypotheses
    Once the data for this research is gathered, the statistical operations and tests performed in IBM SPSS 24 software may produce interesting findings regarding the correlations of the variables. It was decided that five hypotheses will be tested in this thesis, three regarding the comparisons of Amazon's influence with other stated influences and two regarding the persuasion process, one focusing on elaboration and the other on persuasion knowledge. These hypotheses naturally follow the concepts and arguments that were presented in this section. The hypotheses concerning influences categories are the following: 

H1: Recommendations have a higher influence on Amazon's costumers' choices than marketing communication.

H2: Recommendations have a higher influence on Amazon's costumers' choices than word of mouth.

H3: Recommendations have a higher influence on Amazon's customers' choices than the perceived value of the product.

    The rationale for this kind of configuration of comparisons is because of the previous findings which show that recommender systems have the highest influence among recommendation sources even when they are perceived as possessing less expertise than human experts (Senecal & Nantel, 2004, p. 167). In addition to this, recommendation systems positively affect consumers' willingness to pay for products, even when the recommendations contain significant errors (Adomavicius et al., 2017). The recent research on algorithmic appreciation by Logg, Minson and Moore (2019) further showed that people prefer algorithmic judgment not only over the other people's judgment but also over their own judgment, and that this phenomenon concerns visual estimates and predictions of geopolitical and business events, popularity of songs and prediction of romantic attraction. All of this points to a conclusion that society is starting to rely and put more trust in artificial intelligence and the algorithmic recommendations, which can therefore also be expected for the recommender systems of Amazon.
    Furthermore, to explore the persuasion attempts of Amazon and customers' responses to it, the two remaining hypotheses concern how their persuasion coping mechanisms affect the success of recommendations' influence on them. These hypotheses are stated below:
       
H4: Higher elaboration of information regarding Amazon's recommender systems leads to lesser influence by these systems.

H5: Higher persuasion knowledge regarding Amazon's recommender systems leads to lesser influence by these systems

    The rationale for this kind of configuration of expected correlation is the fact that skeptical consumers- the ones who tend to have developed persuasion knowledge and who are more prone to critically assess persuasion attempts, tend to be harder to persuade (Aytekin, 2015., Obermiller & Spangerberg, 1998). 
3. Methodology
   
3.1 Choice of method
 	While the influence of recommendations on the purchase decisions of Amazon's customers is certainly a topic that presumes prospects for qualitative research, to answer the research question To what extent do recommender systems influence the purchase choice of Amazon's customers? this thesis opted for the quantitative exploration.
    As Bryman suggests (2012, p. 36), quantitative strategy emphasizes quantification in the collection and analysis of data, its approach to relationship between theory and research is deductive rather than inductive, and it finds ontological orientation in objectivism, rather than constructionism. It is precisely due to this deductive approach, quantifiability and objectivism that this method was chosen, since the mentioned characteristics were identified as the ones that could ensure the proper operationalization of the previously presented theoretical concepts. Namely, the reasoning was that by using the numerical scores in the form of Amazon's users' agreement level to the statements regarding both influences and persuasion, comparison of influences and correlation of persuasion coping mechanisms and Amazon's influence could be objectively tested.
    Following this logic, a survey in the form of questionnaire was chosen as proper technique of data collection. A survey is a method in which quantifiable data about many people in a certain point of time is collected with aim of examining the connection between the several variables and of detecting possible existing patterns of association (Bryman, 2012, p. 60). Furthermore, survey is an appropriate method for the collection of standardized data that is used for testing the hypotheses which can be done by distributing the questionnaire (Kelley, Clark, Brown & Sitzia, 2003, p. 261).
    Faced by the choice of whether to perform offline or online survey, the latter was chosen due to its overall better convenience starting from the fact that it enables global reach (Evans & Mathur, 2005, p. 196). Timewise, online method is more suitable as it gives respondents the opportunity to take as much time as they need and choose the moment when it is convenient for them to take the survey (Regmi, Waithka, Paudyal. Simkhada & van Teijlingen, 2016, p. 641). Also, online survey is cost-efficient as it excludes the costs of printing papers and it gives access to specific online communities that would be harder to reach and contact in offline environment (Wright, 2017); such is the case of community of Amazon's shoppers. Naturally, the online method also has some disadvantages such as issues regarding difficulty of direct contact and access to some communities since e-mail addresses may not available or moderators could refuse to grant access to their communities (Wright, 2017). Some other issues, as noted by Evans and Mathur (2005, p. 201-202) include inability to provide clarifications of the survey and its questions to the participants during their filling-in process. Also, there may be some technical problems regarding internet connection or understanding of the internet protocols, also representativeness issues as well as privacy concerns.
	Nevertheless, it is evaluated for this research that the advantages of online surveying outweigh the disadvantages, further so as the impact of the stated disadvantages can be minimized in the upcoming research. Namely, to circumvent the problem of direct contact, the response rate will be statistically improved by high quantity of posts of the survey on various groups on social media platforms. Next, to reduce the problems regarding the clarity of survey, instructions both at the beginning of the questionnaire and before each question are made as clear as possible and the e-mail address of the researcher is provided in case of any additional questions by participants. Regarding the privacy concerns, in the beginning of the questionnaire respondents are explicitly informed about the data handling and the nature of its use for the purposes of research at the Erasmus University. Participants are also directly asked to indicate their consent for participation, the action without which it isn't possible for them to proceed to fill in the survey. Lastly, the stated difficulties for participants regarding issues of the internet itself (such as lack of accessibility and disability to use Internet) can be neglected since this thesis explores users who actively visit the Amazon's website, meaning that it is expected that such problems don't apply to them.

3.2 Data collection
    To reach the participants for the survey, the non-probability technique of sampling was engaged, meaning that non-randomized method was used and that the identification of suitable participants was up to researcher's judgement. While it is noted that this technique may have its shortcomings in the lack of generalizability, it is chosen as it is easy to apply, inexpensive and less complicated in comparison to randomized sampling methods (Showkat & Parveen, 2017). To further explain the sampling technique, among non-probability techniques, the mixed sampling technique containing elements of purposive sampling and snowball sampling was used. Purposive sampling means that the selection of participants was aligned to the purpose of the research; hence the target were the communities of Amazon users, while the snowball technique means that people who respond to the survey are asked to further spread the survey (Showkat & Parveen, 2017), in this case to other Amazon's users that they know of.
    Following this sampling strategy, in the period between May 13th and May 20th, the questionnaire was distributed across digital social media platforms; namely Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn and Reddit. The targets were groups, posts, tweets and communities with the name, description or content which suggested that they could be an adequate place to reach Amazon's customers, such as the ones labeled "Amazon's users", "Amazon UK", "Amazon US", "Online shoppers" etc. Also, communities with interest in marketing and artificial intelligence were contacted as well as asked to help spread the survey. 
    To filter the responses once they were gathered, the main requirement for the entrance of the data into the analysis was that the participants are active Amazon's users, meaning that they have purchased something through Amazon during the last six months, and that they are older than 18. As for the further sample related aspects of the research, there weren't any noticeable limitations or focuses regarding demographics of the participants. 
    The termination of the survey on May 20th resulted in 266 recorded responses, However, 34 of those were by participants that only partially filled in the survey, which is why they were immediately excluded from the research. Furthermore, since 20 respondents answered that they didn't use Amazon to purchase something in the last six months, they weren't qualified to participate in the survey and were therefore also excluded. Once the data was imported into IBM SPSS 24 for analysis, it was further established that five respondents, despite consenting, indicated that they were younger than 18, so these were also excluded. Finally, after these reductions and data cleaning, the number of qualified participants for the analysis was 188.
        Of those 188 respondents included in the analysis, 60.1% were men (n=113), 36.7% were women (n=69), 1.6% identified as other gender (n=3) and remaining 1.6% of survey takers preferred not to disclose their gender (n=3). Respondents were between 18 and 66 years old, with the average age being 29.62, median being 27 and mode being 23. Regarding the nationalities, the data set contained 29 nationalities from five continents (Europe, North and South America, Asia and Australia) with the significant 43.1% of participants being citizens of the United States of America (n=81). After the United States, the three next most represented countries were Croatia with 11.7% (n=22), Germany with 9.3% (n=18) and United Kingdom with 9.0% of respondents (n=17). From the overall data set, as much as 91% of participants indicated that they had their own personal Amazon account (n=171) (while for the other 9%, it may be speculated that they use accounts from family, friends, share an account etc.). Regarding the purchase frequencies, close to half of all participants (45.2%) have used Amazon to buy something only 1 to 5 times in the last six months (n=85), while 16% of them have used it more than 20 times in the given time frame (n=30). As for the product categories, the most popular ones to order from Amazon amongst the participants were consumer electronics, media products (books, CD's and DVD's) as well as health and personal care items. For each of these, more than half of all participants indicated that they have ordered a product in the last six months that falls within them (consumer electronics = 63.3%, media products = 55.9%, health and personal care = 53.7%). 
	The aim of this chapter was to describe the sampling and sample of the research in order to present the characteristics of participants of this research. As observable, the data indicates that the participants of this research are mostly citizens of the European Union and The United States of America and that most of them have their own personal account on Amazon, the most popular products they order being consumer electronics, media products and health and personal care items. Also, the demographics indicates young population with the dominant gender being male, but not by significantly large extent.
    Once the data have been gathered, the next step was to proceed to the analysis with the aim of addressing the hypotheses. Before continuing with the results of the analysis, however, the operationalization of the theoretical concepts needs to be presented. This was a crucial step in the construction of the survey which aimed to ensure the reliability of the research findings.

3.3 Operationalization
    After the hypotheses for this research have been constructed, abstract concepts of influences on consideration set, elaboration likelihood model and persuasion knowledge needed to be concreted, shaped and presented to the participants of the study in a way that would ensure hypotheses to be answered properly. To do so, these concepts were measured with questions presented to the participants of the survey that included seven-point Likert-scale statements of agreement. Likert-scales are set as statements for which the respondents are asked to show the level of their agreement on a scale from "strong agreement" to "strong disagreement". Statements are then grouped into factors using factor analysis, the statistical operation which reveals the dimension of participant's attitude about the issue that the research explores (Joshi, Kale, Chandel & Pal, 2015, p. 397).
    As for the construction of these scales regarding the content of the statements, especially for the statements regarding influences, the primary inspiration for their creation was found in the book Handbook of marketing scales: multi-item measures for marketing and consumer behavior research (Bearden, Netemeyer & Haws, 2011). This is a collection of multi-item self-report measures used in consumer behavior and marketing research which has proved useful since it includes certain templates of questions regarding influences and purchase decisions. Furthermore, to construct the persuasion scales regarding concepts of persuasion knowledge, the article How to measure persuasion knowledge by Ham, Nelson and Das (2015) was used as it also provides certain useful templates. 
     In the following pages the operationalization of these concepts will be further presented starting with the influences and then moving on to persuasion. 

    
    3.3.1 Operationalization of Influences 
    As mentioned earlier, along with Amazon's recommendations, the proposed categories of influences on consideration set in this research were marketing communication, word of mouth and perceived value. These categories were introduced to ensure that the research indeed covers relevant influences on the consideration set and enables the comparison of these with the influence of Amazon's recommendations, all with the aim of answering the research sub-question How do Amazon's recommendations as an influence compare with other influences in affecting the purchase decisions of Amazon's customers?
	Regarding Marketing communication, the scales were mostly focused on advertisements, as they measured to what extent respondents find them reliable, insightful and deceitful. Other than advertising, this category also included one scale about brand messages on social media as the respondents were asked to evaluate the information on products that they see there. Foundation for the operationalization of this influence were scales from Public opinion towards advertising (Bearden et al., 2011, p. 332) category of scales in the Handbook of marketing scales.
	Regarding Word of mouth, the scales were set to investigate whether the respondents were more comfortable to buy a product when people have given them the opinion about it and whether they tend to seek advice from friends and take into consideration online reviews submitted by strangers. Foundation for the operationalization of this influence were scales from Information seeking (Bearden et al., 2011, p. 102) Opinion seeking (Bearden et al., 2011, p. 105), and Tradition as a factor (Bearden et al., 2011, p. 352) categories of scales in the Handbook of marketing scales.
	Regarding Perceived value or price-quality ratio, the rationale of scales was to find out to what extent the Amazon's users tend to search for the lower prices and be aware of the alternatives before purchasing products. Foundation for the operationalization of this influence were scales from Purchase decision involvement (Bearden et al., 2011, p. 268) and Price perception (Bearden et al., 2011, p. 378) categories of scales in the Handbook of marketing scales.
	Unlike for the presented influences, the scales that could refer to influence of Amazon's recommendations weren't abundant in the literature. Therefore, to create the scales for measuring Amazon's recommendations, the rationale was to be as specific as possible in order to get respondents to understand the statements and answer them properly, respecting clarity, focus and proper syntax. It was decided therefore that participants indicate whether they follow the Amazon website's recommendations when purchasing products and the logic behind the order of their appearance, as well as whether they self-perceive that they are influenced by them.
    The categories mentioned above were constructed in such manner as means of preparation for the exploratory factor analysis, a statistical method whose purpose is to explain larger set of variables with smaller latent constructs (Henson & Roberts, 2006, p. 394), or in other words, to group scales into adequate categories.

    3.3.2 Factor analysis of Influences
    Before performing the factor analysis, two of the scales from the marketing communication were reversed ("Most advertising is intended to deceive rather than to inform" and "Most advertising makes false claims") as they differed from the rest of the variables in their original form due to their negatively constructed statement syntax. This means that the reversed logic of numbering was applied to them in SPSS (1=7, 2=6, 3=5, 4=4, 5=3, 6=2, 7=1) so that they could be numerically and logically aligned with the all other variables and produce meaning accordingly.
    Finally, 18 seven-point Likert-scale based items regarding the influences were entered into the factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1.00), +KMO = .79, χ2 = 986.51, p < .001. The resultant model explained 63.7% of the variance in Influences. Factor loadings of individual items onto the four out of five factors proved to follow the logic pre-specified in the construction of the research. In that sense, the first four categories (factors) that resulted from the factor analysis were indeed Amazon's recommendations (α = .82, M = 15.24, SD = 6.00), Marketing communication (α = .79, M = 15.13, SD = 5.46), Word of mouth (α = .65, M = 16.43, SD = 3.05) and Perceived value (α = .63, M = 17.06, SD = 2.94). However, since the reliability analysis for the Word of Mouth  indicated that the removal of  one scale would improve the overall reliability of the factor (to α = .72, M = 5.76, SD = 1.02), that particular scale ("I seek advice from friends on which products I should buy") was indeed removed, leaving the factor with only two scales ("I feel more comfortable buying a product when people have given me their opinions on it" and "The online reviews submitted from strangers affect whether or not I will buy a certain product").
	Additionally, factor analysis produced a fifth factor, the one that consisted of two scales, namely "I use brands that my family buys or has bought in the past" and "I am more likely to buy products that are on the discounts". However, due to the fact that this factor consisted of only two items for which the reliability was too low (α = .33) as well as the fact that no significant mutual meaning could be assigned to these two items, the factor was dropped out of the research and the two scales went back to the independent state. Therefore, the four factors that were set to be used in the analyses for influences were the same as the categories of influences specified before the data collection - Amazon's recommendations, Marketing communication, Word of mouth and Perceived value. Their factor analysis scores (rotated component matrix) can be viewed in Table 1 below. 









Table 1: Influences on purchase of Amazon's customers: Item loadings on a four factor principal components solution.

                  Amazon's    recommendations                    Marketing     communication           Word of    mouth    Perceived   valueI (dis)agree with the following statement: - Amazon's recommendations affect my purchase choice.800.- I follow recommendations on Amazon when purchasing a product.794.- Amazon's recommendations work well in determining which products I may like.761.- I am more likely to follow the first result/recommendation of Amazon rather than second or third.724 
- Most advertising is intended to deceive rather than to inform (Reversed)

.761- Advertising is reliable source of information about the quality and performance of products
.759 - Most advertising makes falls claims (Reversed).708- Brand messages on social media give me essential information about products
.695- Ads give me essential information about products.686
- I feel more comfortable buying a product when people have given me their opinions on it

.770- I seek advice from my friends on which products I should buy.690- The online reviews submitted from strangers affect whether I will buy a certain product or not
.663
- I'm willing to make an extra effort to find lower prices
.776- It is important for me to be aware of all the alternatives before buying an expensive item
.762- I always check alternatives on Amazon.com to be sure I get the best value for money I spend
.670
      Cronbach's alpha
      Eigenvalue                          .82
                        4.25                     .79
                    2.34        .65
      1.77              .63
            1.40    
    
    3.3.2 Operationalization of Persuasion 
    To find a feasible way to answer the remaining two hypotheses of this thesis and accordingly to the research sub-question To what extent Amazon's recommendations' influence differ depending on the users' persuasion knowledge and their degree of the elaboration of recommendations?, it was important to operationalize the models of persuasion knowledge and elaboration likelihood. 
    The Likert scales whose focus was on measuring elaboration were seeking to investigate the amount to which respondents gave thought about the logic behind Amazon's recommendations or why Amazon would think that these would be appropriate for them. What was also measured here was the extent to which respondents assigned legitimacy to the recommendations because of the fact that they are personalized for each customer. The foundation for the constructed scales was found in the scale categories Thinking potential (Bearden et al., 2011, p. 34) and Impulsiveness (Bearden et al., 2011, p. 73) of the Handbook of marketing scales. Furthermore, literature on elaboration likelihood itself (Petty and Cacioppo, 1986; Tam & Ho, 2005) provided rationale to focus on measuring motivation and ability and on the concept of personalization while constructing scales. 
     Next, the concept of persuasion knowledge was operationalized with the aim to measure whether respondents are aware of the logic and of possible sales agendas behind Amazon's recommendations on the website. The foundation for these scales was the article How to measure Persuasion knowledge (Ham et al., 2015) from which the existing scales were mostly taken and slightly modified to fit in this research on Amazon. For instance, the scale "I can see through sales tricks and gimmicks used by salesmen" would be transformed into "I can see through sales tricks of Amazon to get costumers to buy certain products.
      In the same manner as for the Influences variables, prior to the factor analysis, the three Persuasion scales were reversed using IBM SPSS 24 ("The fact that the recommendations on Amazon are personalized for me makes me think they are legitimate", "I don't give too much thought about the logic behind Amazon's recommendations" and "The order in which Amazon's recommendations appear on the website is legitimate because it was made to suit me personally") as they were the only ones among Persuasion scales that were set to indicate lack of skepticism and lack of evaluation of the incoming information, instead of the opposite.
    
    3.3.3 Factor analysis of Persuasion
    Following this, 8 seven-point Likert-scale based items regarding the persuasion (both Elaboration and Persuasion Knowledge) were entered to the factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1.00), +KMO = .58, χ2 = 294.7, p < .001. The resultant model indicated three factors which cumulatively explained 65.4% of the variance. The first two factors were the expected ones,  Elaboration (α = .65, M = 12.23, SD = 3.98) and Persuasion Knowledge (α = .51, M = 15.29, SD = 3.06), while the two additional scales regarding personalization ("The fact that the recommendations on Amazon are personalized for me makes me think they are legitimate" and "The order in which Amazon's recommendations appear on the website is legitimate because it was made to suit me personally") were matched together under the high reliability score (α = .81, M = 9.71, SD = 2.54) and therefore formed a separate factor named Personalization. And since even without these items Elaboration factor contained three reliable scales, this separation didn't prove to harm the research process or make the H4 less possible to answer. On the contrary, it complemented the research with valuable finding - giving additional insight about the importance of personalization in the purchase process. 
    What did initially seem as a problem after the factor analysis was the fact that Persuasion Knowledge factor had not too strong reliability (α = .51). Therefore, in order to answer the last hypothesis, H5, the decision was made to "break up" this factor and to answer H5 by addressing each of the three scales ("I understand how Amazon makes recommendations", " I'm aware that Amazon uses recommendations as means to sell more products" and "I can see through sales tricks used by Amazon to get consumers to buy certain products") separately.
    Results of the factor analysis (rotated component matrix) for Persuasion scales can be found in the Table 2 below.
    











Table 2: Amazon customers' persuasion coping: Item loadings on a three-factor principal component solution.

ITEMS
PersonalizationElaborationPersuasion KnowledgeI (dis)agree with the following statement:
- The order in which Amazon's recommendations appear on the website is legitimate because it was made to suite me personally (Reversed)           .898- The fact that the recommendations on Amazon are personalized for me makes me think they are legitimate (Reversed)
            .886 - I often wonder about the logic behind the order of recommendations that appear on the Amazon       .803- I don't give too much thought about the logic behind Amazon's recommendations (Reversed)           .795 - When seeing a recommendation for the product on Amazon, I try to evaluate why Amazon would think that this product is suitable for me
         .679 - I understand how Amazon makes recommendations                  .753 - I can see through sales tricks used by Amazon to get consumers to buy certain products                    .725 - I'm aware that Amazon uses recommendations as means to sell more products                     .630
Cronbach's alpha

Eigenvalue
                   .81

                 2.01            .65

          1.75                        .51

                      1.48







3.4 Methodology overview
    In this methodological section of the thesis, it was first argued that the survey in the form of questionnaire was found as most suitable method for this research due to its efficiency regarding time process, and as it is a less intrusive method. It was described how the survey was distributed across relevant social media channels and that the most respondents were from the United States and European Union. 
    And though issues of reliability and validity are hard to eliminate completely while constructing any research, it was the aim of this thesis to minimize these risks as much as possible. As mentioned, to ensure the reliability of research by making it objective rather than subjective while creating scales, the rationale for their construction was according to the existing scientifically acknowledged scales from Handbook of marketing scales: multi-item measures for marketing and consumer behavior research (Bearden et al., 2011) and from the systematic review of persuasion knowledge scales by Ham, Nelson and Das (2015). As for the validity of the research, the quantitative approach in the form of survey was chosen as it was suitable to explore both sub-questions of the thesis. Namely, comparison of influences seems objective when able to be numerically expressed, as well as persuasion coping, which is backed by the fact that persuasion knowledge is most commonly researched using survey as a method (Ham et al., 2015). To further assure validity of this research, participants were chosen among Amazon's users who are active on the platform and they were assured that they can leave the research at any point, minimizing the pressure put on them while filling in the questionnaire. 
    Finally, the results from the factor analysis were presented to indicate that the theoretical concept of consideration set including four relevant influences as well as concepts of elaboration likelihood model and persuasion knowledge were successfully operationalized and ready to be used in statistical tests in order to answer hypotheses. All the choices made regarding factors after the factor analysis were in accordance with the maximization of the reliability of the research.
     In regards to this, it has been noted that while the hypotheses H1, H2, H3 and H4 will be answered using the factors that are aligned to the categories as specified prior to the factor analysis, the last hypothesis H5 will be addressed three times - individually by each of the three scales that were specified for the factor Persuasion knowledge.
    
  4. Results

Once the theoretical concepts were operationalized, put into the measurable Likert scales and as the factor analysis produced factors, the data of the research was ready to provide answers to the hypotheses. To do so, statistical tests were performed in IBM SPSS 24. In this chapter, findings of these tests will be presented for each of the five hypotheses.

4.1 Influences
    Since H1, H2 and H3 have all been set to compare the influence of Amazon's recommendations with certain other influence, once the normality test proved normal distribution, these hypotheses could be answered by performing the paired-samples t-test in SPSS, which, as noted by Field (2009, p. 324), is used to measure the difference between the means of two groups. Now, for each of the hypotheses the results of this test will be presented:

       H1: Recommendations have a higher influence on Amazon's customers' choices than marketing communication.
    To address this hypothesis, a paired-samples t-test was conducted to compare means of the factor Amazon's recommendations and factor Marketing communication. There was a significant difference in the scores for Amazon's recommendations (M=3.81, SD=1.27) and Marketing communication (M=3.03, SD=1.09) conditions; t (187) = 7.82, p = 0.000. These results suggest that people tend to be influenced more by Amazon's recommendations then by marketing communication when purchasing a product on Amazon; therefore, the hypothesis H1 can be confirmed. 

    H2: Recommendations have a higher influence on Amazon's customers' choices than word of mouth. 
    To address this hypothesis, a paired-samples t-test was conducted to compare means of the factor Amazon's recommendations and factor Word of mouth. There was a significant difference in the scores for Amazon's recommendations (M=3.81, SD=1.27) and Word of mouth (M=5.75, SD=1.02) conditions; t (187) = -20.5, p = .000. These results suggest that people tend to be less influenced by Amazon's recommendations then by word of mouth when purchasing a product on Amazon; therefore, the hypothesis H2 can be rejected.

       H3: Recommendations have a higher influence on Amazon's customers' choices than the perceived value. 
   To address this hypothesis, a paired-samples t-test was conducted to compare means of the factor Amazon's recommendations and factor Perceived value. There was a significant difference in the scores for Amazon's recommendations (M=3.81, SD=1.27) and Perceived value (M=5.69, SD=0.98) conditions; t (187) = -16.8, p = 0.000. These results suggest that people tend to be less influenced by Amazon's recommendations then by perceived value when purchasing a product on Amazon; therefore, the hypothesis H3 can be rejected.

   To conclude, the results from the paired-samples t-test for the hypotheses regarding the influences on consideration set suggest that Amazon's recommendation influence is only higher than the influence of marketing communication. Furthermore, based on the means obtained from the t-tests, the hierarchy of influences looks as follows:
   
1. Word of mouth (M=5.75)
2. Perceived value (M=5.69)
3. Amazon's recommendations (M=3.81)
4. Marketing communication (M=3.03)
	
(for all combinations of comparisons p<0.05 with exception of the comparison of Word of mouth and Perceived value.)





4.2 Persuasion
    While for the comparisons of influences the performing of the t-tests was sufficient to get the results, the hypotheses H4 and H5 required a more sophisticated test. Since these hypotheses contain both continuous independent and dependent variables, they are suitable to be answered using the linear regression, a statistical test in which one variable serves as a predictor and the other serves as outcome variable (Field, 2009, p. 198). In this thesis all the independent variables regarding Persuasion (factor Elaboration, three separate scales regarding factor Persuasion knowledge and factor Personalization which was to be assessed even though it was not specified in the hypotheses of the research in search for interesting findings) were tested in a single regression model to find correlation with dependent variable Amazon's recommendations.
    After normality tests confirmed normal distribution of all variables, a regression model containing the five mentioned predictors proved to be significant, F=18.01, p=.000, R2 =.33. In the continuation of the chapter, the results for each of the variables will be assessed and their associated hypothesis addressed. This will also be done with the Personalization factor.

    H4: Higher elaboration of information regarding Amazon's recommender systems leads to lesser influence by these systems
    To answer this hypothesis, as discussed, a linear regression with the influence by Amazon's recommendations' score as criterium and Elaboration as one of the predictors was conducted. The elaboration amount showed to have a significant positive influence on being influenced by Amazon's recommendations while purchasing (β = .17, p = .007).
    Since the results indeed point to the positive correlation between two variables rather than a negative one, the hypothesis H4 has to be rejected. 

    H5: Higher persuasion knowledge regarding Amazon's recommender systems leads to lesser influence by these systems
    As mentioned earlier, due to the reliability issues of the factor Persuasion knowledge, the decision was made during the operationalization of the variables to address this last hypothesis in a different manner. Namely, the three variables (scales) that have previously formed the mentioned factor ("I understand how Amazon makes recommendations", "I'm aware that Amazon uses recommendations as means to sell more products" and "I can see through sales tricks and gimmicks used by Amazon") will be now be presented in sub-hypotheses and be answered separately. 
    
    H5a: Higher understanding of how Amazon makes recommendations leads to lesser influence by them
    To answer this sub-hypothesis, as mentioned earlier, a linear regression with the influence by Amazon's recommendations' score as criterium and understanding of their creation as one of the predictors was conducted. The understanding of Amazon's recommendations' creation showed no significant correlation on being influenced by Amazon's recommendations while purchasing (β = .00, p = .995). The sub-hypotheses H5a therefore couldn't be confirmed. 

    H5b: The understanding of the fact that Amazon uses recommendations as sales instrument leads to lesser influence by them
	To address this sub-hypothesis, as mentioned earlier, a linear regression with the influence by Amazon's recommendations' score as criterium and understanding of the marketing aspect of the recommendations as one of the predictors was conducted. The understanding of marketing aspect of the recommendations showed no significant correlation on being influenced by Amazon's recommendations while purchasing (β = .10, p = .113). The sub-hypothesis H5b therefore couldn't be confirmed.
	
       H5c: Understanding of the sales tricks behind Amazon's recommendations leads to lesser influence by them
	To address this sub-hypothesis, as discussed, a linear regression with the influence by Amazon's recommendations' score as criterium and understanding of the Amazon's sales tricks as one of the predictors was conducted. The understanding of Amazon's sales tricks had a significant negative correlation on being influenced by Amazon's recommendations while purchasing (β = - .21, p = .002). Therefore, the sub-hypothesis H5c could be confirmed. 
    According to the Persuasion knowledge results presented above, while no significant correlation was found regarding first two variables, it was concluded that people indeed tend to be less influenced by Amazon's recommendations if they understand Amazon's sales tricks.
    As previously mentioned, the factor analysis of Persuasion produced the third factor -Personalization next to Elaboration and Persuasion knowledge Despite the fact that it wasn't specified in the hypotheses, Persuasion was also analyzed in the same manner as Elaboration and Persuasion knowledge, assessing whether there is a positive correlation between the perception of recommendations as positive because they are personalized and being influenced by Amazon's recommendations.
    Therefore, as discussed, a linear regression with the Amazon's recommendations' (influence) score as criterium and trust in them due to personalization as predictor was conducted. The trust in recommendations due to their personalizing nature had a significant positive correlation on being influenced by Amazon's recommendations while purchasing (β = .49, p = .000).

4.3. Findings and discussion

4.3.1 Influences 
    Concerning the impact on purchase decisions, this research shows that Amazon's recommendations' influence isn't higher when compared to the influence of customers' perceived value of the product (price-quality ratio) or to the word of mouth sources (opinion of other people, online reviews). Research also shows that Amazon's influence on purchase decisions tend to be higher when compared to the influence of marketing communication sources (ads, social media PR messages). 
    In the hierarchy of the four relevant influences on the purchase decisions of Amazon's customers, Amazon's recommendations took the third place, scoring lower than Word of mouth, contrary to what was expected based on the algorithmic appreciation trends (Logg et al., 2019, Senecal & Nantel, 2004) and lower than Perceived value, contrary to what previous research concluded about consumers' impulse and willingness to pay for the products as the results of them being suggested as recommendations (Adomavicius et al., 2017).
    The reason behind these contradictions may be in two factors. First, two of these researches (Adomavicius et al., 2017; Logg et al., 2019) regarding recommendations didn't put whole focus on the e-retail but were either widespread in their exploration of recommender systems across platforms of many types or they focused predominantly on media products. Second, while Senecal & Nantel (2004) do focus on e-retail sector when exploring recommendations' influence, their research was performed decade and a half ago, with the internet expansion happening later than that. In the meantime, the online buyers may have become more adjusted to the fact that algorithms are also marketers and salesmen, therefore gradually developing persuasion coping mechanisms in the online environment. Due to the stated factors- or to put it differently- due to the differences in findings of previous research and this one, it can be interpreted that people nowadays tend to be less influenced by the recommender systems in e-retail environment and more while choosing intangible products such as songs or videos.
    

4.3.2 Persuasion
   Concerning the Elaboration aspect of Amazon's influence, research shows that contrary to the expected, the higher the elaboration of the recommendations by the person, the higher is the likelihood of that person to be influenced by them. Contrary was expected due to a fact that skepticism is often tied to a higher elaboration and better persuasion knowledge, both of which presume resistance to persuasion attempts (Aytekin, 2015., Obermiller & Spangerberg, 1998). To interpret this finding, one could conclude that the reason for such correlation is the trust in the recommendations by those who have high motivation and ability to critically evaluate them. This can be due to the personalized nature of the recommendations of each user, as another finding of this research suggests that those who trust recommendations for this very personalization tend to be indeed more influenced by them. 
   Concerning the Persuasion knowledge aspect of Amazon's influence, the only significant correlation found suggests that those who self-assess that they understand the Amazon's sales tricks and tend to be less influenced by recommendations, which was expected. 
   These two findings, regarding Elaboration and Persuasion knowledge, can also be interpreted together, as the elaboration and persuasion knowledge are both part of the persuasion coping mechanism of the consumer. In that sense, whether they recognize the personalization as the main feature and the advantage of Amazon's recommendations may determine their persuasion response. Those who recognize personalization as advantage and something positive may follow the recommendations and those who don't may evaluate them as sales trick of Amazon and therefore not be affected by them. 
  5. Conclusion 

5.1. Reflection on the conducted research
    Inspired by the observation of Amazon's rapid growth on the one hand and of the increased use of machine learning in online marketing on the other, the research question set to answer was To what extent do recommender systems influence the purchase decisions of Amazon's customers? 
    To explore this, the focus was primarily put on comparing the influence of Amazon's recommendations with other existing influences on costumers and secondarily, on exploring if there's a difference in how people evaluate and respond to Amazon's persuasion attempt depending on their elaboration of information and their persuasion knowledge. 
    Regarding the influences, the theoretical concept of consideration set provided insight into the buyer's decision-making process which starts with acknowledgement of the purchase alternatives and ends with the purchase decision, being on constant "attack" from the different influences. These relevant influences were then identified by the help of previous research and literature, so that their impact could be compared to Amazon's recommendations. As for the persuasion, the Elaboration likelihood model and Persuasion knowledge model showed that there is a dynamic process in persuasion as both the agent and the target participate and that every attempt of persuasion can lead to either high or low elaboration by the consumer based on its ability and motivation for elaboration.
    The research was performed as an online questionnaire survey, the method which was chosen because of its convenience and because it was suitable for operationalization of hypotheses into the Likert-scaled statements that were presented to the respondents. After the data was gathered, four groups of influences emerged from the factor analysis, namely Amazon's recommendations, Marketing Communication, Word of mouth and Perceived value, just as was expected from the construction of the scales. As for the persuasion, factors Elaboration, Persuasion Knowledge and Personalization emerged from the factor analysis, but since the reliability of Persuasion Knowledge wasn't the strongest, the decision was made to analyze each of the statements in that factor individually rather than as a group. 
    To address the primary sub-question of this research How do Amazon's recommendations as an influence compare with other influences in affecting the purchase decisions of Amazon's customers?, it can be concluded that, when compared to recommendations, only marketing communication has lesser influence on Amazon's customers' purchase decisions. Other relevant influences - value of the product (price-quality ratio) as perceived by customer and the word of mouth both proved to be stronger influences on purchase decisions.
   As for the secondary sub-question How Amazon's recommendations' influence differ depending on the users' persuasion knowledge and their degree of the elaboration of the recommendations?, the results didn't show any statistically significant difference in influence between people with higher and lower understanding of the logic behind Amazon's recommendations and their sales-oriented nature. However, it was observed that people who tend to understand sales tricks of Amazon tend to be less influenced by the recommendations on the platform. Furthermore, regarding the elaboration, results indicate the interesting finding that people who tend to have higher motivation and ability to evaluate Amazon's recommendations tend to be more influenced by these results. Regarding persuasion, additional finding of the research showed that people who tend to trust recommendations' personalization nature are also more influenced by them, which indicates algorithmic appreciation.
   The aim of the following subchapter is to provide rationale for the meaning of these results.

5.2. Implications for marketers and consumers
    Following the findings of the research, the Amazon's marketers should acknowledge the fact that users who elaborate the recommendations more tend to follow them more. Marketers should therefore work on getting more people to elaborate the recommendations, for instance by finding a way to educate about them and further put emphasis on the process of personalization as rationale to trust them. Furthermore, the fact that conventional marketing communication such as advertising and PR communication scores the lowest in the hierarchy of influences on the purchase decisions is something that has implications for all marketers and should be taken into consideration. Since respondents tend to be more influenced by word of mouth than by advertising, contemporary marketers who offer quality products should put more emphasis on interpersonal marketing, finding a way to generate word of mouth campaigns and generally stimulate indirect communication in order to boost sales.
	As stated in the introduction of the thesis, one of the motivations for making an inquiry into the topic of recommendations' influence was the fact that Amazon is becoming an ordinary way of purchasing so it was needed to assess whether there's too much power in controlling which brands Amazon's consumers get by presenting recommendations. As it turns out, their power is not too high, since the customers significantly more rely on interpersonal influences and tend to seek for the alternatives whose quality would best justify the amount of their money spent. Therefore, it can be concluded that regarding the e-commerce's pivot Amazon, society is still not at the stage where the algorithmic appreciation would triumph over the traditional recommendation sources as people are still reluctant to trust artificial intelligence. Nevertheless, the educational efforts should be greeted, so that the people recognize both advantages and disadvantages of recommender systems.
	Finally, the results of this study should serve as inspiration for scientific community to put effort in exploring the trust in recommender systems across various platforms not just in e-retail but also in media consumption, to see if there are differences in the hierarchy of influences which were used in this research. This way, it could be seen how these hierarchies look in various industries. Furthermore, while it is important that future research expands knowledge gathered from this research, it should also re-assess findings of this research by using different techniques and measures, as there are certainly shortcomings of this research design. This is further discussed in the following chapter.

5.3. Limitations and suggestions for further research
    This research, like most others, has certain limitations regarding the choices made in its construction which may have affected the results in the certain manner. Since the limitations of this research naturally presume further research to be performed, both limitations and suggestions for further research will be presented together in this chapter.
    The first limitation arises from the fact that certain scales presented to the respondents were self-perceptive in nature, meaning that participants had evaluated by themselves whether they think specific influences affect their purchasing habits and whether they elaborate information coming from recommendations and understand persuasion. The next survey attempt could put complete focus of researcher's assessment of Amazon's users regarding these phenomena, rather than partly relying on their self-perception and self-assessment. Furthermore, zooming out of the survey as a method, one should acknowledge its shortcomings regarding the questionability of the honesty of participants' responses, which is why the experiment may prove as another way to answer the research questions of this research. For instance, it would be interesting to compare results regarding categories of influences on purchase decisions from this research with the ones obtained from the experiment research, especially to see whether marketing communication would also score as low when compared with other stated influences. Since marketing messages are notorious for their subconscious impact on consumers, it may be the case that the agreement statements presented in this research regarding marketing communication didn't suffice in reaching the real conclusion regarding its impact. 
    Zooming out furthermore, there are limitations in quantitative research itself. For instance, while categories of Marketing Communication, Word of mouth and Perceived value certainly have their relevance in the existing literature which made them a choice for this study, they are indeed the only ones on which this research has focused. Exploratory aspect of qualitative research on this topic, which could be performed in the form of content analysis and interviews, may provide additional insight into the aspects of influences and persuasion, further complementing the findings of this thesis. 
    
    












6. References
	 
Abideen, Z.U., & Saleem, S. (2011). Effective advertising and its influence on consumer buying behavior. European Journal of Business and Management, 3(3), 55-65
Adomavicius, G., Bockstedt, J.C., Curley, S.P., & Zhangc. J. (2018). Effects of online recommendations on consumers' willingness to pay. Information Systems Research, 29(1), 84-102. doi:10.1287/isre.2017.0703 
Aggarwal, P., Tomar, V., & Kathuria, A. (2017). Comparing content based and collaborative filtering in recommender systems. International Journal of New Technology and Research, 3(4), 65-67.
Ahmad, N., Vveinhardt, J., & Ahmed, R.R. (2014). Impact of word of mouth on consumer buying decision. European Journal of Business and Management, 6(31), 394-403.
Albari & Safitri, I. (2018). The influence of product price on consumers' purchasing decisions. Review of Integrative Business and Economics Research, 7(2), 328-337.
Andrews, C. (1988). Motivation, ability, and opportunity to process information: Conceptual and Experimental Manipulation Issues. Advances in Consumer Research, 15, 219-225.
Awan, A.G., & Fatima, A. (2014). Impact of marketing strategies on youth purchasing behavior: A case study of mobile phone industry. British Journal of Marketing Studies, 2(4), 72-80.
Ayanwale, A.B., Alimi, T., & Ayanbimipe, M.A. (2005) The influence of advertising on consumer brand preference. Journal of Social Sciences, 10(1), 9-16.
Aytekin, P. (2015). Persuasion knowledge and ad skepticism. International Journal of Research in Social Sciences, 4(10), 8-14.
Beneke, J., Flynn, R., Tamsin, G., & Mukaiwa, M. (2013). The influence of perceived product quality, relative price and risk on customer value and willingness to buy: a study of private label merchandise. Journal of Product & Brand Management, 22(3), 218-228. doi:10.1108/JPBM-02-2013-0262
Bearden, W.O., Netemeyer, R. G., & Haws, K. L. (2011). Handbook of marketing scales: Multi-item measures for marketing and consumer behavior research. Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE. 
Boyce, J.A., & Kuijer, R.G. (2014). Focusing on media body ideal images triggers food intake among restrained eaters: A test of restraint theory and the elaboration likelihood model. Eating Behaviors, 15, 262-270. doi:10.1016/j.eatbeh.2014.03.003 
Brown, J.J., & Wildt, A.R. (1992). Consideration Set Measurement. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 20(3), 235-243. doi:10.1007/BF02723410 
Bryman, A. (2012). Social research methods. New York, United States: Oxford University Press Inc.
Cabezudo, S.J., Gutierrez-Arranz, A.M., & Gutierrez C. (2009). The combined influence of central and peripheral routes in the online persuasion process. Cyberpsychology, Behavior and Social Networking, 12(3), 299-308. doi:10.1089/cpb.2008.0188
Cyr, D., Head, M., Lim, E., & Stibe, A. (2018).  Using the elaboration likelihood model to examine online persuasion through website design. Information & Management, 55, 807-821.
doi:10.1016/j.im.2018.03.009 
Eliaz, K., & Spiegler, R. (2011). Consideration sets and competitive marketing. Review of Economic Studies, 78, 235-262. doi:10.1093/restud/rdq016
Evans, J.R., & Mathur, A. (2019). The value of online surveys. Internet Research, 15(2), 195-219. doi:10.1108/10662240510590360
Field, A. (2009). Discovering Statistics Using SPSS. London, United Kingdom: SAGE Ltd.
Frewer, L.J., Howard, C., Hedderley, D., & Shepherd, R. (1997). The Elaboration Likelihood Model and communication about food risks. Risk Analysis, 17(6), 759-769.
doi:10.1111/j.1539-6924.1997.tb01281.x   
Friestad, M., & Wright, P. (1994). The persuasion knowledge model: How people cope with persuasion attempts. Journal of Consumer Research, 21(1), 1-31. doi:10.1086/209380
Gregory, C.K., Meade, A.W., & Thompson, L.F. (2013). Understanding internet recruitment via signaling theory and the elaboration likelihood model. Computers in Human Behavior, 29, 1949-1959. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.04.013 
Haider, T., & Shakib, S. (2018). A study of the influences of advertisement on consumer buying behavior. Business Studies Journal, 9(1), 1-13.
Ham, C.D., Nelson, M.R., & Das, S. (2015). How to measure Persuasion knowledge. International Journal of Advertising, 34(1), 17-53.
Hauser, J.R. (2014). Consideration-set heuristics. Journal of Business Research, 67, 1688-1699.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2014.02.015
Henson, R.K., & Roberts, J.K. (2006). Use of exploratory factor analysis in published research: Common errors and some comment on improved practice. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 66(3), 393-416.
Isinkaye, F.O., Folajimi, Y.O., & Ojokoh, B.A. (2015). Recommender systems: Principles, methods and evaluation. Egyptian Informatics Journal, 16, 261-273. doi:10.1016/j.eij.2015.06.005
Joshi, A., Kale, S., Chandel, S., & Pal, D. K. (2015). Likert scale: Explored and explained. British Journal of Applied Science & Technology, 7(4), 396-403.
       doi:10.9734/BJAST/2015/14975
Katawetawaraks, C., & Wang, C.L. (2011) Online shopper behavior: Influences of online shopping decision, Asian Journal of Business Research, 1(2), 66-74.
Kelley, K., Clark, B., Brown, W., & Sitzia, J. (2003). Methodology matters: Good practice in the conduct and reporting of survey research. International Journal for Quality in Health Care, 15(3), 261-266.
Kumar, D.P., & Raju, K.W. (2013). The role of advertising in consumer decision making. Journal of Business and Management, 14(4), 37-45.
Lackermair, G., Kailer, D., & Kanmaz, K. (2013). Importance of online product reviews from a consumer's perspective. Advances in Economics and Business, 1(1), 1-5.
	doi:10.13189/aeb.2013.010101
Logg, J.M., Mison, J.A., & Moore, D.A. (2019). Algorithm appreciation: People prefer algorithmic to human judgment. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 151, 90-103. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2018.12.005
Lü, L., Medo, M., Yeung, C.H., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Z., Zhou, T. (2012). Recommender systems. Physics Reports, 519, 1-49. DOI: 10.1016/j.physrep.2012.02.006
McNeill, B.W., & Stoltenberg, C.D. (1989). Reconceptualizing social influence in counseling: The Elaboration Likelihood Model. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 36(1), 24-33. 
Morris, J.D., Woo, C.M., & Singh, A.J. (2005). Elaboration likelihood model: A missing intrinsic emotional implication. Journal of Targeting, Measurement and Analysis for Marketing, 14(1), 79-98. doi:10.1057/palgrave.jt.5740171
Obermiller, C., & Spangenberg, E.R. (1998). Development of a scale to assess consumer skepticism toward advertising, Journal of Consumer Psychology, 7(2), 159-186.
Pechmann, C., & Catlin, J.R. (2016). The effects of advertising and other marketing communication on health-related consumer behaviors. Current Opinion in Psychology, 10, 44-49. doi:10.1016/j.copsyc.2015.12.008 
Petty, R.E., & Cacioppo, J.T. (1986). The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 19, 123-205. doi:10.1016/S0065-2601(08)60214-2 
Petty, R.E., Cacioppo, J.T. & Goldman, R. (1981). Personal involvement as a determinant of argument-based persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 41(5), 847-855. 
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.41.5.84 
Regmi, P.R., Waithaka, E., Paudyal, A., Simkhada, P., & van Teijlingen (2016). Guide to the design and application of online questionnaire surveys. Nepal Journal of Epidemiology, 6(4), 640-644. 
Roberts, J.H., & Lattin, J.M. (1991). Development and testing of a model of consideration set composition. Journal of Marketing Research, 28(4), 429-440.
Sarwar, B., Karypis, G., Konstan, J. A., & Riedl, J. (2001). Item-based collaborative filtering recommendation algorithms. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on World Wide Web, WWW 2001 (pp. 285-295). (WWW '01). New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. doi:10.1145/371920.372071
Senecala, S., & Nantel, J. (2004). The inﬂuence of online product recommendations on consumers' online choices. Journal of Retailing, 80, 159-169. doi:10.1016/j.jretai.2004.04.001  
Shang, Q., Pei, G., & Jing, J. (2017) My friends have a word for it: Event-related potentials evidence of how social risk inhibits purchase intention. Neuroscience Letters, 640, 70-75. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2017.02.023
Shocker, A.D., Ben-Akiva, M., Boccara, B., & Nedungadi, P. (1991). Consideration set influences on consumer decision-making and choice: Issues, models, and suggestions. Marketing Letters, 2(3), 181-197.
Showkat, N., & Parveen, H. (2017). Non-probability and probability sampling. E-PG Pathshala, 1-9. Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/ 
Shukla, P. (2010). Impact of interpersonal inﬂuences, brand origin and brand image on luxury purchase intentions: Measuring inter-functional interactions and a cross-national comparison. Journal of World Business, 46, 242-252. doi:10.1016/j.jwb.2010.11.002 
Statista (2019). Brand value of the 25 most valuable brands in 2019 (in million U.S. dollars). Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/
Statista (2019). Global advertising spending from 2010 to 2019 (in billion U.S. dollars). Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/
Statista (2019). Projected retail e-commerce GMV share of Amazon in the United States from 2016 to 2021. Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/
Statista (2019). Retail e-commerce sales worldwide from 2014 to 2021 (in billion U.S. dollars). Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/ 
 Symeonidis, P., Ntempos, D., & Manolopoulos, Y. (2014). Recommender systems for location-based social networks. New York: Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-0286-6
Tam, K.Y., & Ho, S.Y. (2005). Web Personalization as a persuasion strategy: An Elaboration Likelihood Model perspective. Information Systems Research, 16(3), 271-291.
 doi:10.1287/isre.1050.0058 
Tutaj, K., & Reijmersdal, E.A. Effects of online advertising format and persuasion knowledge on audience reaction. Journal of Marketing Communications 18(1), 5-18. doi: 10.1080/13527266.2011.620765
Vroomen, B., Franses, P.H., & Nierop, E. (2004). Modeling consideration sets and brand choice using artificial neural networks. European Journal of Operational Research, 154, 206-217.
Wright, K.B. (2017). Researching Internet-based populations: Advantages and disadvantages of online survey research, online questionnaire authoring software packages, and web survey services. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 10(3). 
 doi:10.1111/j.1083-6101.2005.tb00259.x   
Yang, S.F. (2015). An eye-tracking study of the Elaboration Likelihood Model in online shopping. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 14, 233-240.
doi:10.1016/j.elerap.2014.11.007 




7. APPENDIX - Survey

Hi there, dear participant! My name is Mihael Gelo.
As a student of Media studies on the Erasmus University of Rotterdam in The Netherlands, I'm doing a research project about Amazon's recommendations and their influence on purchase decisions. 
Recommendations appear on Amazon's website as information about products that could be potentially interesting to the users based on their previous activity (search, purchases, ratings and likes) as well as the activity of other users.
The data from your answers will be kept confidential and used ONLY FOR THE PURPOSES OF MY MASTER THESIS. 

This survey should last 5-8 minutes. While I would really appreciate you reaching the end of the questionnaire (so that your response counts as legitimate), bear in mind that you can leave this survey at any point.
By filling in this questionnaire you're helping me get my masters' degree, therefore I'm very thankful for your time :)
For any questions you might have, feel free to contact me via email: 512149mg@student.eur.nl
Before we start, please tick the following box to give your consent to participate.

To start, I would like to determine whether you are an active customer of Amazon e-commerce service. Did you use Amazon to purchase something within the last six months? 
Yes
No

Do you have your own account on Amazon?
Yes
No


Approximately, how many times did you purchase something through Amazon in the last six months?
1 - 5 times
6 - 10 times
11- 20 times
More than 20 times

How old are you? (Please input the number that corresponds to your age)
________
What is your gender?
Male
Female
Other
Prefer not to say

What is your nationality?
*Choose from the list of countries*

In which country do you currently reside?
*Choose from the list of countries*

In the following questions, please indicate how strongly you disagree or agree with each of the following statements by placing a check mark in one of the spaces on the scale.

Advertising is reliable source of information about the quality and performance of products Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
									
Ads give me essential information about products					
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
		
Brand messages on social media give me essential information about products	
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
						
Most advertising is intended to deceive rather than to inform			
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
				
Most advertising makes false claims									
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree	
Agree	
Strongly agree

I use brands that my family buys or has bought in the past				
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
			
I feel more comfortable buying a product when people have given me their opinions on it
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
							
I seek advice from my friends on which products I should buy			
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
				


The online reviews submitted from strangers affect whether I will buy a certain product or not
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
								
In the following questions, please indicate how strongly you disagree or agree with each of the following statements by placing a check mark in one of the spaces on the scale.

I'm willing to make an extra effort to find lower prices				
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
			
I always check alternatives on Amazon.com to be sure I get the best value for money I spend
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
								



I am more likely to buy products that are on the discounts				
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
			
It is important for me to be aware of all the alternatives before buying an expensive item
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
									
I follow recommendations on Amazon when purchasing a product			
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
				
Amazon's recommendations work well in determining which products I may like	
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
						
Amazon's recommendations affect my purchase choice				
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
			
I am more likely to follow the first result/recommendation of Amazon rather than second or third
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
								
Before our decision to buy a certain product, we're all influenced by certain factors.
Please try to think about how the following ones affect you and then rank them from 1 to 5.
(1 being the factor that influences your purchase choice the most)

Amazon's recommendations
Family/friends
Online reviews of products
Marketing (brands' messages, advertisements etc.)
Value (price-quality ratio) of products



You're near the end of the survey.
In the following questions, please indicate how strongly you disagree or agree with each of the following statements by placing a check mark in one of the spaces on the scale.

I understand how Amazon makes recommendations				
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
		
I'm aware that Amazon uses recommendations as means to sell more products	
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
						
I can see through sales tricks used by Amazon to get consumers to buy certain products
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
									

When seeing a recommendation for the product on Amazon, I try to evaluate why Amazon would think that this product is suitable for me						
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree

The fact that the recommendations on Amazon are personalized for me makes me think they are legitimate
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
									
I don't give too much thought about the logic behind Amazon's recommendations
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
									




I often wonder about the logic behind the order of recommendations that appear on the Amazon
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree
								
The order in which Amazon's recommendations appear on the website is legitimate because it was made to suite me personally									
Strongly Disagree
Disagree	
Somewhat disagree	
Neither agree nor disagree	
Somewhat agree
Agree
Strongly agree

Finally, before finishing the questionnaire, I'd like you to indicate which categories of products did you purchase on Amazon in the last six months.
(Choose as many options as applicable)

Media products (books, CD's, DVD's, software)
Consumer electronics
Clothing
Beauty products
Food and groceries
Health and personal care items
Industrial and scientific supplies
Kitchen items
Jewelry / Watches
Lawn and garden items
Musical instruments
Sporting goods
Tools
Automotive items
Toys and games
---None of the above---
 



































"Take Back Control. Make America Great Again."

How the Vote Leave and the Trump 2016 campaigns persuaded voters.








Student name: Abdelfattah Ali  
Student number: 487093
Word count: 25,927
Supervisor: Dr. Joao Fernando Ferreira Goncalves 

Media, Culture and Society
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication 
Erasmus University Rotterdam

Master thesis
November 2020






Abstract
	In 2016, news about a British data marketing firm called Cambridge Analytica started to surface in the United Kingdom and the United States of America. The firm was accused of covertly harvesting Facebook users' data and crafting special advertisements that would appeal to those users during political campaigns. The news cycle, at the time, started to decrease as the politician that was linked to the news and the firm, Ted Cruz, has failed to win the Republican Party's nomination for the US presidential election in 2016. 
	In 2018, the Cambridge Analytica name made a strong comeback to the news after Chris Wylie, Cambridge Analytica's director of research, -as he describes his role in the firm, and the scandal's whistle-blower accused his firm of manipulating millions of voters in the UK during the Brexit referendum and the U.S. during the presidential elections in 2016. This manipulation, according to Wylie, was done by creating targeted ads that helped the Vote Leave and the Trump 2016 campaigns to maliciously,gain political victory by deceiving voters in these two countries. This act of deceiving was done by the ads containing, according to Wylie, fake news. While this might seem as a since-fictional claim, this claim goes in line with the claim Cambridge Analytica made about itself, as a company that is able to alter audience behavior. 
	This study is an attempt to analyze and provide an account of the persuasion techniques that these ads contained. By underscoring these techniques, readers would be better able to identify such sophisticated ads and/or news. 
	This is a comparative study that relied on existing research and literature in different disciplines and linked the components that were known about these types of ads, political communication, populism and online disinformation. The combination these elements have provided a clear guide to explore this understudied area. Moreover, this study was conducted by using qualitative research methods through the triangulation of multi-modal rhetorical and thematic analysis to investigate 50 Facebook ads/posters, and 20 television ads used by the Vote Leave Campaign in the UK and the Trump 2016 Presidential Campaign in the U.S., and compared the results of the persuasion techniques of both campaigns.
	The results suggest that both campaigns used highly similar persuasion techniques and strategies in crafting their ads, however, this similarity was also highly contextual. 


	Keywords: Cambridge Analytica, Brexit, Trump, fake news, persuasion techniques.


Acknowledgement 

       No words can express my gratitude to those that have helped me during my journey at Erasmus University Rotterdam. During my journey, I was very lucky and grateful to be taught by such an incredible group of teachers and, being surrounded by the most loving and supportive class-mates. 
	To my thesis supervisor, Dr. João Gonçalves, I am more than grateful for your guidance, support and patience during this project and also during the classes you taught me through this Master's program. 
	To my beloved wife, Mais, and sons, Omar and Karim, your love, support and motivation keeps me going, and seek a better version of me every day. 
























1 Table of Contents
1	Introduction	4
1.1	Social and scientific relevance	8
2	Theoretical framework	10
2.1	Part one	11
2.1.1	Cross-national comparative studies	11
2.1.2	The UK vs. the US as different cases	12
2.1.3	Cultural differences between the UK and the US	13
2.2	Part two	18
2.2.1	Political communication	18
2.2.2	Political messages and partisanship	19
2.2.3	Political advertisements	20
2.2.4	Populism and the populist rhetoric	22
2.2.5	Political persuasion techniques	23
2.2.6	Political communication in the age of new media	25
2.2.7	Online political- campaigning, advertising, and disinformation	27
3	Methodology and research design	29
3.1	Methodological approach and units of analysis	29
3.2	Sampling	32
3.2.1	Group-one	33
3.2.2	Group-two	35
3.2.3	Group-three	36
3.2.4	Group-four	36
3.3	Operationalization	37
3.3.1	Text motivation	37
3.3.2	Advertisement Type	37
3.3.3	Text analysis	39
3.3.4	Visual analysis	40
3.3.5	Rhetorical strategies	40
3.3.6	General tone	42
3.3.7	Counterevidence	42
3.3.8	Thematic analysis	42
3.4	Reliability, validity and credibility	44
3.4.1	Credibility	44
3.4.2	Validity	45
3.4.3	Reliability	46
3.4.4	Rhetoric-as-epistemic	46
5	Results	47
5.1	Group 1	47
5.2	Group two	59
5.3	Group Three	66
5.4	Group-four	69
6	Discussion	72
6.1	Main conclusions	72
6.2	Socio-theoretical implications and study limitations	73
7	References:	75












































1 Introduction

	Beware of false knowledge; it is more dangerous than ignorance. (George Bernard Shaw 1856-1950).

	In Western democracies, the use of disinformation on social media networks in political campaigns by populist politicians has triggered (political) communication scholars, governmental and non-governmental bodies to investigate this phenomenon, especially after the United Kingdom (UK) voted Leave during the Brexit referendum in 2016, and Donald J. Trump becoming the 45th president of the United States (U.S.) in the same year. While disinformation is not a new strategy in political communication and campaigning (Allcott and Gentzkow, 2017 as cited in Zhou and Zafarani, 2018), observers and scholars gave it special attention due to the short and long term devastating effects it has on democracy, particularly, after accusing the two campaigns of using citizens' (voters') data on social media to predict their political tendencies (Scott, 2018), and thus, made it easier for both campaigns to appeal to what concerns voters the most (Cadwalladr, 2017).
       Disinformation, or what is commonly, yet erroneously, referred to as 'fake news', seemed to strongly serve populist politicians in reaching their goals in terms of gaining political power in some countries, while it did not have the same effect in others (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). The varying effectiveness of disinformation is due to its reliance on several factors. Factors such as historical developments (e.g., the recent immigration crisis in Europe and the fears of a religious, cultural or ethnic transformation that might follow), fluctuating economic performance, growing unemployment rates, etc. seemed to be more concerning to the people in some countries, but also some generations within these countries were more concerned about these issues (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). A very prominent demonstration of the difference in effectiveness of the disinformation strategies can be found in the victory of the two aforementioned campaigns in the UK and the US, but its failure, as of the moment this research was done, in other Western democracies like the Netherlands and France. More illustrations will follow in the following section. 
		Historically, military coups, or other forms of use of force, were the key cause for subverting democracies worldwide. Nowadays, however, it is elected officials, namely populists, with intentions of subverting "the very process that brought them to power" (Levitsky and Ziblatt, 2018, p.4) that possess real threat to democracies, i.e., through the ballot box. This may lead to severe consequences, causing democracies to fail due to populist politicians not respecting the, back then, unwritten, yet widely consented values of democratic practices and conventional wisdom (Levitsky and Ziblatt, 2018; Norris and Inglehart, 2019). For example, deceiving voters (disinformation, and employing social networks to spread it). This objective with the intention to hold power in a country starts as early as the political campaign of the politician (candidate) or the political party (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). 
       Populist politicians, such as Donald Trump in the US, and Boris Johnson, the current Prime Minister of the UK and leader of the Vote Leave Campaign in the Brexit referendum, tended to heavily rely on sensationalist and false news to achieve their political endeavors  (Rose, 2017; Norris and Inglehart, 2019). In 2016, both Johnson and Trump, adopted a clear anti-establishment rhetoric by channeling their focus on criticizing the entire political system in their own countries and by attacking other countries and blaming them for hurting their own countries', among others, economic performance (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). The term system here refers not only to the political establishment, but also to the internal economic, cultural, and social establishment, and the country's external relationships with other countries and bigger political and economic bodies (such as the United Nations, the European Union, The World Trade Organization, etc.). This anti-establishment rhetoric was encapsulated in the Vote Leave Campaign's slogan "Let's Take Back Control" (Virdee and McGeever, 2017 p. 1804) that implied a lack of sovereignty. Moreover, this anti-establishment rhetoric adopted by pro-Brexit politicians had a significant consequence on the effectiveness of the Vote Leave Campaign and led to the electoral victories not only in the Brexit case, but also put the European political establishment/s at stake (Hobolt, 2016; Norris and Inglehart, 2019). Similarly, one of the Trump Campaign 2016 slogans #DrainTheSwamp was focused on attacking the political and economic system in the country's Capital, Washington D.C., and the economic capital, Wall Street. Draining the swamp Trump was referring to is the corruption that he accused lobbyists of in order to define an enemy he constantly attacked during his campaign. (Lahitou, 2016). 
After the UK voted to leave the EU and, parallelly, Trump being elected president of the US, allegations discrediting the practices of the two campaigns started to surface. Accusations of relying heavily on sensational news and disinformation led the British Parliament (https://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-committees/culture-media-and-sport/Fake_news_evidence/Vote-Leave-50-Million-Ads.pdf) and the US Senet (https://www.intelligence.senate.gov/sites/default/files/documents/Report_Volume2.pdf) to launch formal inquiries to investigate both the Vote Leave Campaign and the Trump 2016 campaign for creating political ads that contain false, and out-of-context news and/or information to persuade their voters and gain political victory (Cadwalladr & Glendinning, 2018); readers in this paper is used interchangeably with the terms voters, audience and citizens. This use of disinformation was considered to be an outrageous abuse of new technologies in democratic societies, even if these practices were not at the time, regulated or restricted (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). 
	As a general rule, rhetoric and rhetorical techniques do not only signify a campaign's and/or a political movement's political tendencies, but also are some of the main factors that determine its success or failure depending on how it will resonate with the people (voters) (Fallis, 2017). Although readers (voters) are usually critical about the information they receive from media and their voting behavior is a more complex process which is not only determined by the quality of the political campaign, rhetoric can. Resilient emotional appeals, for example, are in some cases capable of changing readers' minds about controversial issues (Fallis, 2017). 
	The analysis of the rhetorical appeals in political advertisements, especially during political campaigns, may not be as strait forward as it may seem. The complexity of decoding the political messages, in political ads, by different people, is derived from the accumulation of many layers of personal knowledge, beliefs, cultural or ethnic background etc. that shape the audience (readers) understanding. Accordingly, the interpretation of a media message decoded in the content a reader consumes, remains, disproportionately, individualistic on its own right. Therefore, one way or another, the targeted audience of the political ads play a role in the creation of these ads, as the content creators aim at producing advertisements that would resonate with and influence their voting decisions. 
       Taking online disinformation into account, the two analyzed cases in this thesis are of high significance due to them both being the first campaigns known to target voters on social media networks by using their own information and mobilize them. This significance is also derived from the allegations of covertly hiring a firm - Cambridge Analytica, to collect Facebook users' data (voters), analyze it, and designing advertisements that appeal to them most based on predefined voter's segments that resulted from the analysis of the collected data (Cadwalladr & Glendinning, 2018; Scott, 2018). This heavy use of false news (disinformation) by both campaigns played a pivotal role in mobilizing people to vote for the two campaigns and was an integral part of their rhetoric in the two campaigns (Rose, 2017). Disinformation in this project, as will be revisited in the next chapter, refers to false information (news) that intends to cause harm and/or personal gain for the creator's own benefit.  
       One of the other significances of the two campaigns, is that their leaders had strong ideological ties and similarities. On of the similarities between the two campaigns in terms of ideology, the Vote Leave, as part on the bigger Leave movement that included several other campaing, and the Trump 2016 Campaign, Wilson (2017) signifies these similarities as follows: it was common between both campaigns to refute and underestimate experts' opinions on important matters (e.g., the human effect on global issues such as global warming); both campaigns were xenophobic and promised to reduce immigration from other countries, especially Muslim countries; both campaigns were hostile towards international bodies (the EU in the UK case, and the North America Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in the Trump 2016 case); finally, both campaigns put enormous effort in the nationalistic appeals (the UK once more a global power outside the EU, and "Make America Great Again").
       In 2016, Barack Obama, the former president of the U.S. was on a visit to the UK, and while he was in press conference with the UK Prime Minister, David Cameron, and Obama urged the British people to vote remain in the EU, describing that the EU as a source that magnifies the British global power (Wilson, 2017). Similarly, Nigel Farage, the back then leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), member of the European Parliament and leader of the Leave.eu organization went to the U.S. to support Trump in his rallies (Wilson, 2017), signifying the struggle between two wings in the two countries, one fighting to keep the global and national political-establishment, and the other fighting to change it. 
	In 2015, Donald Trump was awarded the Lie of the Year Award by Politifact, an online factchecking platform (Wilson, 2017). Trump's claims that were described by the platform as false news (disinformation) or inaccurate includes: Muslim Americans were cheering during the collapse of the Twin Towers on September 11th 2001; the majority of white Americans were murdered by African Americans; and, that the Mexican government encouraged its citizens with criminal backgrounds to enter the U.S. (Wilson, 2017). Similar false and racial allegations were made by the Vote Leave Campaign before the Brexit event (Wilson, 2017). 
       Intrigued by the similarities between both campaigns in terms of being led by right-wing populist politicians, sharing many ideological values, and, most importantly, being accused of employing disinformation as a tool to persuade voters on social media, the following research question was developed:
       
       In their political communication advertisements, how similar were the persuasion techniques between the Vote Leave Campaign advertisements in the United Kingdom with the Trump Presidential Campaign in the United States in 2016? 
       
	This research question was broken down into four sub-questions. This was due to my decision to analyze not only Facebook advertisements of both campaigns, but I decided to include television commercials, assuming that it will enrich the outcome of this thesis by examining a different type of advertisements. 
       To answer the sub-questions, I had to form four groups in which Facebook advertisements and TV commercials would fall in to represent a campaign (Vote Leave or Trump 2016). The groups I formulated contained two groups to represent the Vote Leave campaign, and two groups to represent the Trump 2016 Campaign. 
       The four sub-questions are as follows:
1- What were the persuasive techniques of the Vote Leave Facebook advertisements during the Brexit Vote Leave Campaign in 2016? (Group-one).
2- What were the persuasive techniques of the Trump campaign Facebook advertisements during the U.S. presidential campaign in 2016? (Group-two)
3- What were the persuasive techniques of the Brexit Vote Leave Campaign TV commercials in 2016? (Group three)
4- What were the persuasive techniques of the Trump campaign national TV commercials during the U.S. presidential elections 2016? (Group four)
The main focus of this thesis, as will be more elaborated, was on persuasive techniques and not only on the rhetorical appeals, which was one out of several other dimensions of the analyses conducted.
1.1 	Social and scientific relevance 
	The use of disinformation news in political campaigns to triumph elections or referenda may not be a new phenomenon, the use of new communication technologies in spreading disinformation, however, is. The threat of employing disinformation in political campaigns extends beyond subverting democracies. One of its characteristics that it, inherently, and to various degrees, feeds political polarization among citizens in a given democracy (Tucker et al., 2018), which may severely harm a democracy on the long term (Levitsky and Ziblatt, 2018).
	Schmidt (2017) also considered phenomena such as Trump and Brexit to possess serious threat to democracy and democratic political establishments, not only in the countries where these events took place, but also to other countries, namely in Western societies that might take the same path. While many political science scholars consider the Brexit case to be an outlier in Europe and EU countries (Hobolt, 2016) i.e., likely will not be replicated; others, however, forewarned of other possible negative scenarios that may happen in other democracies due to the use of disinformation on social media networks (Schmidt, 2017).  
	 Noticeably, a gap in the study of rhetorical and persuasion techniques related to social media disinformation, populism, and the Brexit and Trump campaigns 2016 exists. When it comes to studies of rhetoric in the events of Brexit and Trump 2016, most studies I found focused more on one event, or compared Trump against Hillary Clinton -former Secretary of State, and Trump's opponent in the American presidential elections in 2016 (see Savoy, 2018); or a content analysis of the Twitter supporters of Trump and Brexit (see Leidig, 2019); or just conducted a rhetorical analysis of Trump's presidential speeches (see Lahti, 2018). Additionally, due to what new communication technologies offer in terms of data collection about users (Cadwalladr & Glendinning, 2018), and how politicians may hire such companies to covertly provide analyses about voter-political-tendencies based on the big-data they collect about users in a given country, the study of rhetorical and persuasion techniques of these events may provide an account, and potentially be useful to scholars studying populist rhetoric and/or developing online automated disinformation and/or populist speech detection on social media networks. Moreover, after what is known as the Cambridge Analytica scandal, and the EU regulated data collection, social media platforms constantly develop 'legal' ways to continue collecting users' data. 
       Advertisements crafted in relation to the Cambridge Analytica scandal are known to journalists as dark ads (Cadwalladr, 2017). The dark ads were the Vote Leave Campaign advertisements that were crafted by psychologists related to Cambridge Analytica and targeted voters in the UK based on what they thought would appeal to the readers most, with the intention of persuading them to 'vote leave' out of the EU (Cadwalladr, 2017). On the other hand, the British Parliament final report on the scandal refuted the term 'fake news,' and named these ads as disinformation ads (House of Commons, 2018). 
       Similarly, the Trump presidential campaign 2016 was accused of using corresponding techniques to urge voters to vote for Trump (Rose, 2017; Cadwalladr, 2017). Therefore, this study aimed at analyzing the persuasion techniques that were implemented in these ads that were described as a sort of disinformation advertisements designed to deceive voters to gain political victory by the two campaigns during the two events of Brexit and the US presidential elections in 2016.
       Due to the lack of research on these two cases in terms of analyzing the persuasion techniques used during the two campaigns, this research is exploratory in nature. By exploratory it is meant that the aim of this research is to learn more about the persuasion techniques that were used by the two campaigns in their disinformation advertisements as this, at the time, was a completely a new phenomenon that is still not fully understood.
       This research is socially relevant for detailing how online disinformation became widely used in political campaigns, namely, political campaigns related to the far-right and populist movements or politicians (Schmidt, 2017). Additionally, because people are not able, most of the time to recognize and spot online disinformation (Alphilippe et al., 2019) reading such research may increase their understanding of how content is designed by recognizing the appeals that such groups focus on, even if the content does not have any direct reference to them, especially in times of major political campaigns (e.g., the current Presidential election in the U.S.). 
       Finally, this research is potentially, professionally relevant to those who work on online disinformation detection and machine learning by providing an account of the used persuasion techniques in the two campaigns. For example, Zhou and Zafarani (2018) called for studying rhetorical appeals in online disinformation. Although their call was initially to study it using quantitative research methods, as mentioned earlier, this study, at least in the English language, remains the first about these two important campaigns. 
	










2 Theoretical framework
       Democracy is sustained not only by institutions but by culture. (Author unknown).

       The theoretical framework section in this thesis is divided into two main parts. Part one reviews the difference between the two cases -Vote Leave and the Trump Campaign 2016, in terms of the political-cultural differences and historical background, which in turn reflects on how political media messages are crafted. Part two reviews political communication, including the design of political advertisements, with special focus on online disinformation and the populist rhetoric that was used in the creation of the advertisements in two campaigns. 
       In general, this chapter reviews the main concepts that are related to the research question of this thesis. 
       
2.1 Part one
       In this part, I underscore the aims of this comparative study and some of the relevant differences between the UK and the US that played a role in the interpretation of the sample.  
	 
2.1.1 Cross-national comparative studies
	Conducting cross-national comparative studies has different intentions. In this study, I follow the guidelines set by Livingstone (2003). Livingstone (2003) notes that such studies should mention explicitly their aims such as: to improve the understanding of other countries; to examine a theory in different settings or contexts; "examine transitional processes across different contexts, [...] improve international understanding [...]" (p. 479). Choosing these reasons are justified as follows. Britain leaving the EU, and Trump wining the presidential elections in the US in 2016 has raised concerns of the repetition of the same scenarios in other Western democracies such as France, the Netherlands and Italy in Europe (Schmidt, 2017). Furthermore, Schmidt (2017) observed that populists in the UK and in the US in 2016 have been "Using rhetorical strategies and 'uncivil' language in a 'post-truth' environment that rejects experts and mainstream media, they [populists in the UK and the US] have reshaped the political landscape by framing the debates in new ways while using new and old media [...]" (p. 249). Thus, the rhetorical analysis, in its multimodal form, of both campaigns can deepen the understanding of the populists' persuasion techniques in those two unique cases.
        Brader (2005) found that emotional appeals in political campaigns' ads have the capacity of changing voters' behavior in different events of democratic nature. This study aimed at analyzing the persuasive techniques in the political ads and commercials before the two studied campaigns and one of the main focuses is the emotional appeals of these political messages. Also, comparative studies have the capacity to safeguard scholars from falling into false conclusions such as generalizing findings from one country in one period of time to other countries with different contexts and at different time periods by rendering the main differences between the countries understudy (De Veerse, 2017). On the other hand, cross-national comparative studies have been long criticized because of epistemological assumptions, for example, making a unified methodology and expecting it to fit different contexts leading scholars to fall into a common mistake known as "measurement out of context" (p. 482) by denying every country of its "cultural specificity" (Livingstone, 2003 p.482). In this study, special attention was given to cultural specifics of the two countries studied and shortly, some of the main differences will be underscored. Nevertheless, however, if the conceptualization is too specific that it can only be understood in its own distinctive context, comparison studies become redundant as it becomes impossible to draw conclusions about the studied cases anymore (Livingstone, 2003). Therefore, it is crucial to note the relevant differences between the two contexts with special attention for the similarities as well.
2.1.2 The UK vs. the US as different cases
       While the US and the UK are two of the oldest democracies that exist in modern history, they have different ways of holding democratic events. For example, the United Kingdom is a direct democracy where the votes of its citizens are counted directly towards whom/what is being voted for/on (Menselshon & Parkin, 2001). Furthermore, the Vote Leave Campaign sample that was analyzed in this project is a campaign for a referendum, which has different campaigning logics from a presidential campaign (LeDuc, 2000). For example -and not limited to- referenda are events where voters vote on a topic, while presidential election voters vote for a person (LeDuc, 2000). Also, it is important to note here that the Brexit event was an unbiding referendum (Siddique, 2016; Norris and Inglehart, 2019), however, the results were respected by British politicians (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). This difference makes the focus in a referendum on convincing voters on ideas or topics in favor of a certain political group, and in a presidential election, the campaigning is mainly focused on convincing voters to vote for their candidate by putting the candidate in a positive and desirable leader role (LeDuc, 2000). Additionally, the US is a representative democracy, at least in presidential elections, where citizens vote for delegates that would make decisions on their behalf (LeDuc, 2000) through what is known as The Electoral College. 
       Populist rhetoric in political campaigns, especially in elections, tend to adopt what is known as the personalization of politics. That is, impersonating a populist movement in a person or a leader (Block & Negrine, 2017). As will be reviewed latter, this seemed to be the case in the Trump Campaign by drawing the image of Trump to be the person that will "Make America Great Again". On the other hand, this is not the case in the Leave Campaign, at least from the sample analyzed, as the focus was to convince the British to 'vote leave' out of the EU and the use of personalization was minimal. 
	Other differences between the two cases were visible after Schmidt (2017) conducted what she called discursive institutionalism analysis. That is, an interdisciplinary approach to analyze institutionalized discourse, especially, the political discourse. In a recent study, Schmidt (2017) applied this methodology to analyze the institutionalized discourse in both the British and American cases related to the two main events of the Brexit referendum and the US presidential elections in 2016. Schmidt (2017) found and noted important common and different features in the two events and the general atmosphere surrounding them. To illustrate, building on the notion that neoliberalism is well established in both the US and the UK since the 1980s, she argues that both cases were common in attacking the, back then, current political establishment. And while both countries share, among others, the same economic philosophy, both campaigns took different stances on the effects of neoliberal political and economic policies (Schmidt, 2017). For example, Trump attacking the -back then- current political and economic establishment by attacking neoliberal policies, on the other hand, the Leave Campaign remarkably avoided to capitalize on people's anger from such policies (Schmidt, 2016 as cited in Schmidt, 2017). Therefore, while both campaigns aligned to a large extent in their ideology, they had their own differences in terms of which agenda-issues to discuss with their voters. 
       Finally, it is noteworthy that while the differences between the two campaigns are clear in the way they function, these differences did not pose an obstacle for the study aims. First, because of the strong personal and ideological connections between the leaders of both campaigns as mentioned in the introduction, and second, is that the study looked at the phenomenon form its populist, and use of disinformation on social media networks angles. Thus, not only did comparing the two cases deepened the understanding of the recent populist rhetorical techniques, but also the two different types of campaigns resulted in providing a wider picture of the persuasion techniques used in disinformation on social media networks as a strategy to persuade voters. 
2.1.3 Cultural differences between the UK and the US
       According to Hall (2013), in order for a culture to exist, members of this culture must, to various degrees, share the same cultural codes, which entails sharing, broadly speaking, the same language. Language here refers not only to the spoken language consisting of words, but also refers to the assemblage of other sorts of transmitting meaning such as sounds, facial gestures and expressions (body language), symbols, color codes (such as in the traffic lights and how every color refers to a distinct meaning), etc. (Hall, 2013). Furthermore, members of the same culture, are able to, roughly speaking, interpret 'things' or 'words' in the same way, under the assumption that they share the same "conceptual maps" (p. 4) of things or concepts (Hall, 2013). In addition, due to the constant change of the use of language (meaning of things), culture also changes (Hall, 2013). For example, the use of words used to connotate only 'something negative' in a past era such as 'wicked' or 'sick' can be used to express approval and admiration of something and that it is 'beyond limits' among specific cultural groups (Hall, 2013). 
       While the cultural differences between the two countries, in a sociological sense, can be useful, because of how it plays a role in shaping discourse, it was out of the scope of this study, and the focus was on the cultural differences that relate more to the political practices in them. This was due to two reasons. First, it was done as an attempt to narrow the focus on how culture might play a role in making political decisions in the two campaigns when examining the sample. Second, it was an attempt to contextualize the audience (voters) in the two countries in order to understand the reasoning behind the appeals that emerged from the sample and understand why they were chosen. 
       Culture is defined as the way of life, in which a group of people share common practices (norms) and refute others (Mukherjee, 1996). Ahead of pointing out some of the major differences in 'political culture/s' in the two countries, it is important to note, briefly, the differences between the two countries in terms of how they were founded as to further contextualize the audience more in the two cases. This was helpful in the interpretation of the appeals that emerged from the data by revealing the segmented audience these appeals were designed to target. For example, when an advertisement made historical references to events and/or historical figures to evoke a sense of nationalism. For example, as will be reviewed in the results section, when Trump used footage of African-Americans when he referred to the American families, bearing in mind the comments he made on the whites being murdered mainly by black people (Wilson, 2017).  
       The UK is a sovereign state that consists of four countries (England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland) that were unified through a long and complicated history (Johnson, 2015). This 'structure' of the UK was founded by people that, mainly, already existed in these countries. Therefore, broadly speaking, the existing culture/s in the UK is the result of thousands of years of its indigenous peoples' history. In recent history, the UK is not only known for the industrial revolution, but also for its colonial history where the UK colonized countries from six out of seven continents including parts of what is known today as the United States (Brey, 2019). This legacy of colonialism still plays a role in how a great proportion of people in the West, namely in the way UK see their heritage (Wiener, 2013). As Wiener (2013) explains, the notion of neocolonialism developed over the years after World War II and continues to current days in different forms, is adopted by several segments of the societies in the West extending to be taught in Western universities.  
        On the other hand, what led to the founding of the US as known today are events that go back to the discovery of the 'New World' by Christopher Columbus in the fifteenth century and the historical events that followed of colonization, slavery, independence (from the British rule), Civil War, prohibiting slavery and movements of civil rights in the recent history (Jenkins, 2017). These historic events played a role in the formation of the American  character. Namely, of how the country was built on the idea of people immigrating from all parts of the world to start a new, prosperous life in the 'New World'(Jenkins, 2017). The immigration of people from different countries entailed the existence of different cultures that interacted and generated new 'hybrid-cultures' or what is also known as multiculturism. Multiculturism refers to a perspective that acknowledges the cultural differences that exist among members of the society rather than assuming homogeneity of culture (Mukherjee, 1996). Because multiculturism became a 'norm' in the US, which refers to the culture that is adopted by the majority of the people, historically, far right movements such as the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) who are white supremacists that believe in the superiority of the White Race were formed as a counterculture. The KKK, refers to two distinct hate organizations in the US that employed terror to ensure the supremacy of the White Race by attempting to reconstruct the racial supremacy map following the freeing of slaves that was the main reason behind the Civil War (KKK Britannica). Countercultures are movements that defy the 'norm' and are founded in the form of movements by people that share the same views (Costello, 1972). The awareness about historical movements that still play a role in the cultural struggle between different groups in the society, are of high significance to how something as political ads are crafted. To illustrate, when some ads refer to an issue of controversy between readers (e.g., the right to bear arms in the U.S.) that is usually adopted by readers that lean more to the right-wing on the political spectrum. For example, 56% of Republicans (right-wing) see that mass shooting would decrease if more people owned guns, and 64% of Democrats see that these accidents would decrease if less people owned guns (Oliphant, 2017). 
       In a more rigid attempt to categorize citizens (voters) in both the U.S. and the UK, Norris and Inglehart (2019) assert that people, do indeed, form what they referred to as tribes. Tribes, according to Norris and Inglehart (2019), are imaginary communities that are "demarcated by signifiers of us versus them [...]" (p. 7). These tribes hold shared values and traditions that go beyond just sharing race and religion extending to, among other shared traits, the same culture and dialect. Additionaly, Norris and Inglehart (2019) theorize that the term 'tribe' as a structure holds more to it than simply being a lose conception about a group of people, especially in times when these people feel individual and collective danger that threatens their 'way of life'. Building on this notion, Norris and Inglehart (2019) rationalize that the politics of fear is indeed a lead tactic used by populist politicians, especially ones that hold authoritarian values, to gain political power in Western democracies. While this notion might seem to strongly dismiss the audience's agency in terms of not being critical about the information they consume from media, Norris and Inglehart (2019) argue that this state was a result of Western democracies reaching what they called the 'tipping point'. As part of the Cultural back-lash theory, the 'tipping point' according the authors, is a point in the political sphere in a specific country where citizens are negatively charged against the political establishment, and involves high levels of individual and collective frustration that concerns the economy, future, cultural values and norms, and in sometimes the racial supremacy map. Therefore, they argue that populist politicians take advantage of this frustration by channeling their focus on activating and mobilizing these angry people by focusing their media messages' topics that appeal to people's fears such as economy or income, immigration, cultural or religious values, etc. 
       The cultural differences between the two countries in which the two events took place also entails the political culture as a general scheme that, to a large extent, guides political practices in a given society. The cultural differences highlighted in this part were used in the analysis. In this section I focus on the main political parties and institutions that represent the right-wing on the UK's political spectrum as the main driving force behind the Brexit referendum including the Vote Leave campaign. In the UK, current political culture consists, like other political systems, from the right-wing, the conservatives, and the left-wing, the liberals (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). The right-wing including parties such as UKIP that was one of the leading Eurosceptic parties and was highly interrelated to, and a supporter of Vote Leave during the Brexit event in 2016 (Walker, 2016; Morillas, 2017). This party, alongside with other far-right parties, such as the National Front and British National Party did not only share Euroscepticism, but also adopted, and called for the implementation of xenophobic policies (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). Xenophobic politics are understood in this research as practices in which different races, and immigration are not accepted, attacked, and seen as a threat that justifies discrimination against them (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). 
       In the US, political culture is different form the UK. The right-wing or the conservatives are represented by the Republican party and has different views from those of the British right-wing shares, however, it is important to note that they do share some ideological values. These differences are apparent in the constitutional rights that allow people and organizations, to bear arms and form militias ("The History Of The Right To Bear Arms", 2020). The Second Amendment in the US Constitution that gave these rights to the American people is one example of the debate over gun control between conservatives and liberals ("The History Of The Right To Bear Arms", 2020). In his first presidential debate in 2020, Donald Trump was asked to condemn white supremacists, in particular, the Proud Boys, a group categorized by the Federal Bureau of Investigations as an extremist group (Belam and Gabbatt, 2020), he refused and told them to "stand-back and stand-by" (Smith, Beckett, Singh and Wong, 2020). 
        Some scholars state that Trump extends from just being a candidate in a presidential election to be a movement on its own right (Lieberman, Mattler, Pepinsky, Roberts and Valelly, 2017). While others that studied American presidents discourse claim that Trump is not an outlier in the American political history (Jordan, Sterling, Pennenbaker and Boyd, 2018). The significance that Trump brought to the US political culture is built on the historical movements in the U.S. For example, Trump hat that reads "Make America Great Again" forming the acronym MAGA. This hat did not only represent Trump as a candidate but also signifies the movement that is referred to as Trumpism ("Understanding Trump and Trumpism", 2020). Moreover, the hat was described by the black fashion critic Robin Givhan as becoming "[...] a symbol of us vs. them, of exclusion and suspension, of garrulous narcissism, of white male privilege, of violence and hate [...]" (as quoted in Tong, 2019). Additionally, the hat was described by the African American rapper Pusha T as "this generation's Ku Klux hood" (as quoted in Tong, 2019).
       From part one it can be concluded that, while both campaigns held similar ideological stances on specific topics (immigration, own country's position on a global scale, and its relationship with bigger bodies, both campaigns have their historical, political, culture and event (referendum vs. elections) specifics that should be accounted for in the interpretation. 
2.2 Part two
In this part I review the traditional populist communication model, then, I link it to social media campaigning and online disinformation. 
2.2.1 Political communication 
	Political communication, regardless of its source and/or level, is not only designed to convey information to constituents, but is also "strategic, intentional and purposive" (p. 391) in nature, and, in principle, is designed to build loyalty (Jacobs, 2017). Furthermore, in modern purposeful political communication, such as in campaigning, there are two main significant developments, first, political communication, as a process, has become highly sophisticated, and second, due to these constant developments, institutional communication developed a more complex (constantly changing) and effective model of political communication (Jacobs, 2017). This is quite evident in the employment of new communication technologies such as social media in political communication. The Vote Leave Campaign for example, made use of the social media networks as platforms to spread their political messages (advertisements) but also made use of algorithms that identified voters that might be susceptible to their messages (Cadwalladr, 2017). 
       Additionally, Jacobs (2017) observed that "Institutional-based communications have, under certain circumstances, more enduring and deeper effects, than the personalistic and often time-delimited aspects of situational framing" (p. 392). In other words, it is thought that institutional-based political communication can be more effective towards constituents than messages that are coming from a less organizational discourse even if it is from a political leader that is functioning in a less informal and less organizational environment. The organization that took place during the Brexit event by the Vote Leave Campaign in terms of adopting a uniform rhetoric is one example, considering that Vote Leave was working alongside and deeply connected to other Eurosceptic organizations. Similarly, the Trump Campaign was not only an organization that used its own institutional-communication with voters, but also was connected to other organizations that supported Trump, adopted the same rhetoric and worked on spreading it on different media platforms. For example, The Heritage Foundation, and The Moral Majority. Takens and van Hoof (2011) argue, on the other hand, that populist politicians make use of political personalization to make the focus of the campaign on the leader as one of the strategies of convincing voters. Also, narrowing the issues agenda during a political campaign makes it easier for the voter to follow the campaign's line of reasoning (Takens & van Hoof, 2011). The research question of this thesis aimed at examining the notion of political personalization, and how the issues agenda is constructed as two distinct persuasion techniques. 
	Political communication has the capacity, under certain circumstances, to affect voter behavior. In other words, make voters, at least on an individual level, change their minds and even change sides during elections. When politicians decide on adopting old or new topics (issues) in relation to a party's political stance (e.g., abortion), Tesler and Zaller (2017) suggest that this adoption of specific topics play a significant role in how a voter reacts to it in terms of voting decisions. To illustrate, they observed that the voter can either change their mind about a topic they had preexisting opinions on, and therefore, align with their original political party, or on the other hand, change sides to vote for the opponent political party. The first case underlines the importance of political communication in its institutional form, the latter, suggests that voters can be critical about information they receive from mass media (Tesler and Zaller, 2017). For the issues-agenda for the two studied campaigns, they adopted, to a large extent, similar issues that they placed their focus on communicating with voters (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). 
       On the importance of the issues agenda topics, Carsey and Layman (2006) theorize that if the topic is of significance to the voter (e.g., aligns or contradicts with strong religious views) and their political party's view on it is different, the voter is likely to switch to another party that aligns to their views, on the other hand, if the topic is of less importance to the voter, they tend to change their views on it to adopt their original party's position (Tesler & Zaller, 2017). In other words, party-sponsored communication can indeed, to various degrees, affect voter behavior (Tesler & Zaller, 2017), and although some of these messages over time "tend to cancel out" (p.79), in some cases, they have the capacity to "swing the outcomes of national elections" (p.79). Moreover, in times where there is a political conflict, data suggests that people who reside with journalist-sponsored messages as opposed to party-sponsored communication tend to be the small minority (Tesler & Zaller, 2017). 
2.2.2 Political messages and partisanship 
	Jarvis (2017) pointed out some of the important roles that the political parties play in a modern democracy such as: "gain elected office, control governing processes, mobilize majorities, structure dissent and opposition, recruit future political leaders, socialize voters, and serve as a connection between campaigns and governance" (p. 133). Consequently, Jarvis (2017) illustrates how parties adopt what he called rhetorical functions; moreover, partisan messages that are conveyed either by party organizations and/or their nominees have the capacity to "reveal priorities, highlight objectives, imply political strategies and offer images of the desired brands" (p. 134). As Jarvis (2017) pointed out, this is mainly done be the party's elites and relying on what he called party labels. Party labels are widely used in the political communication process and serves as main cues that influence voting behavior (Jarvis, 2017). Furthermore, these party labels, according to Jarvis (2017) "provide simple, direct, and consequential information in shaping individual perceptions" (p. 136). According to Herrera (1997), labels are understood by citizens (voters) on different levels of political sophistication and regardless of their level of political participation, also, Herrera (1997) argues that there is a "quite remarkable linkage between the mass public and the political elite with regard to political terminology" (As cited in Jarvis, 2017, p. 137). While these labels are taken for granted features in the political communication process, they play a vital role, and of paramount importance to those who use it. Labeling allows political parties to have their own vocabulary that distinguishes them form other parties and can ultimately lead to affecting, proportionately, voting behavior (Jarvis, 2017). These labels were used by both campaigns as an attack method to discredit their opponents (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). 
2.2.3 Political advertisements
	Political communication studies distinguish political advertisements into three main categories: advocacy, that is, ads that focus on why voters should vote for a nominee (ad sponsor) by showing the voters what is perceived to possess positive and desirable features in the society (Lilleker, 2006), what distinguishes what is positive or negative is called doxa, that is, the shared knowledge in a society (Van Belle, Gillaerts, Van Gorp, Van De Mieroop, & Rutten, 2013); and second, negative, that is, ads that focus on opponents rather than the message sponsor (candidate) to show voters why it is 'not the right thing to do' (Lilleker, 2006), this type of ads is also called attack ads for the attack element it inherently features (Belt, 2017), while others categorize attack ads to be different type of ads on its own account (Dolan in Schultz, 2004) in this thesis negative ads refers to attack advertisements; and finally, contrast ads, that is, advertisements that focus on the positive side of the candidate (sponsor) and the negative side of the opponent (Lilleker, 2006).
	It is quite common that the candidates with lower chances of winning are the ones that start using negative ads as an attempt to increase their chances (Belt, 2017). Additionally, because of the negative information that these ads contain, targeted candidates are required to answer to the information these ads provide, thus, forces them to be in a defensive mode as procrastination may be devastating (Belt, 2017). In this thesis, special attention was given to negative ads in the analysis process, looking for different techniques used in crafting negative ads as explained by Belt (2017). First, as Belt (2017) explains, attack ads are strategically used by candidates to aggravate fear, and to raise doubts about the opponent to create public anxiety. Second, special techniques are used in attack ads to make it more appealing to the targeted audience, for example, the use of black-and-white photos to portray candidates under attack while bright colors are used to portray candidates in positive ads (West, 2014 as cited in Belt, 2017). This change of color that may seem of minor importance is a common technique used by experts crafting political advertisements (Belt, 2017) to signify how they portray the candidate or the subject of the advertisement. Also, the use gray imagery and darker skin tones are used to increase anxiety and reinforce negative stereotypes (Belt, 2017). 
	According to Fallis (2017), audience are active, and the general assumption is that political advertisements work in the same way as all other sorts of political communication, that is, they reinforce preexisting ideas rather than totally changing them. However, Fallis (2017) argues that political ads, on an individual level, can affect voting behavior. Furthermore, Fallis (2017) points to some of the functions and features of political ads in an attempt to illustrate how political ads can affect the voting behavior:
	Voter-learning
	On the one hand, political ads can expand a voter's knowledge on a specific topic or about a specific candidate due to its informative nature, on the other, it can lead to the spread of inaccurate information i.e., disinformation (Fallis, 2017). 
	Emotional appeals
	Different studies found evidence that the most successful political ads are those characterized by making use of strong emotional appeals and, in some cases, even have the capacity to change voter behavior (Belt, 2017; Fallis, 2017). 
	Agenda-setting
	Scholars have found that political ads do not only have the capacity to make voters think about specific topics, but in some cases, political ads have the capacity to channel how people think about these topic, a process known as second-level agenda-setting (Belt, 2017; Fallis, 2017) or framing (see Entman, 1993).   
	Finally, Fallis (2017) also stated that some personal traits in combination with political ads can easily cause a change in voter's behavior such as negativity bias. For example, people tend to weigh negative experiences more than positive ones. Similarly, negative information has more impact on people (voters) than positive news (Fallis, 2017). This has led that the general assumption about how people will react to political ads is that people are expected to recall the negative news or information about a candidate more than they can recall positive ones, especially, while making decisions (Fallis, 2017). Another type of traits that might play a significantly role is confirmation bias. In this type of biases, people tend to pick the information they consume in political ads that serves best their point of view while discarding or dismissing any other opposing information, even if true (Fallis, 2017).

2.2.4 Populism and the populist rhetoric
	While there is no unified definition for populism, drawing on their own, among other scholars' work, Block and Negrine (2017) define populism as "an appeal to people [...]; antielitist, antiestablishment ideologies, sentiments, and tactics [...]; a discourse characterized by belligerent ethos and plain language that provide a sense of closeness between leaders and their politically disenchanted public [...]" (p. 179). Others such as Lilleker (2006) defined it through the elements by which populism as a communication process functions. To illustrate, Lilleker (2006) characterized populism communication as naturally propagandist and rhetorical and can make substantial use of emotionalism and authenticity. 
	Lilleker (2006) defined propaganda as the "communication that is deliberately designed by one group in society to influence the attitudes and behavior of the others. It often uses symbolism and rhetoric and appeals to the emotional and irrational aspects of our sensibility" (p. 162), and "has highly negative associations" (p. 163). According to Lilleker (2006), propaganda generally abides by specific rules, propaganda is designed to draw readers to focus on topics that is not only implied in the text, but also to topics that are beyond the text. This according to the author may cause conflicts between readers over these topics (issues) by making them compare between positive and negative scenarios that are related to these topics discussed. For example, issues such as immigration and how readers would take the stance with or against it, causing societal conflicts.   
	Additionally, populist politicians such as Johnson and Trump, while addressing the masses, they start by 'setting up the stage' for the audience by making claims about how corrupt the 'system' is (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). Then, they tend to focus on what is known as the first-order principles, that is, claims concerning who should lead, and intentionally neglect to address second-order principles, that is, a clear plan about what should be done in order to 'fix the system' (Norris and Inglehart, 2019).
	The use of rhetoric in propaganda entails the use of language and symbolism to make sure that the information encoded in propaganda communication is decoded in the intended way. This means that while the main function of any rhetoric is to persuade the readers, it also encourages them to change their behavior in ways that are desired by those who have created it (Lilleker, 2006). Furthermore, in order for a rhetoric to be successful and resonate with readers, the rhetoric must be designed through crucial understanding of the audience complexities, address their fears, and appeal to their norms and values (Lilleker, 2006), through what was referred to earlier as doxa. Furthermore, populist rhetoric in political discourse is a communication style that, on the most basic level, is an ideological stance against the existing political establishment and, is a sort of instrumentalization of communication as a means to gain political power (Takens & van Hoof, 2011). Likewise, many scholars coincide in the notion that the elements of the populist rhetoric make "positive reference to "the people", and criticism of the political elite" (Jager & Walgrave, 2006 in Takens & van Hoof, 2011, p. 332). 
	Emotionalization refers to the use of emotions in political communication to win the support of the voters; some scholars argue that emotionalization is done by politicians as a response to public demand of seeing the electoral process as an emotional experience (Lilleker, 2006). Likewise, studies in sociology support the notion that emotions is a more powerful force in making voting decisions; studies in political communication, however, show otherwise, and that the voter are rational and can make an informed decision based on logic while weighing who can lead the country with the emotional aspect being a secondary element (Lilleker, 2006). 
	Emotionalization is intrinsically a part of authenticity, that is, a trait by which a politician aims at appearing as 'real' and someone that is close to the voters, in order to make it easier for them to identify with the politician (Lilleker, 2006). This is done by building an authentic image, and this can be achieved by the politician sharing their emotional side or experience with the audience (Lilleker, 2006).
2.2.5 Political persuasion techniques
	When Aristotle wrote his book The Art of Rhetoric (in other translations titled Treatise on Rhetoric or Rhetoric), he categorized oration into three main types based on intentions (uses) and also the tenses that normally follow in the language structure used by the orator. The first type of speech according to Yunis (2018) was branded by Aristotle as forensic (also known as judicial rhetoric), this type of rhetoric is usually in the past tense and is used usually to attack or defend someone in relation to legal settings; the second type is called epideictic (also translated to ceremonial speech) which is a demonstrative rhetoric, and is usually used to describe something in the present tense such as in speeches during wedding ceremonies; and finally, deliberative rhetoric (in some translations symbouleutikon or political), that is, the type of rhetoric that is used seeking to persuade people to do something and/or change a current state, and is usually used in the future tense (e.g., to convince citizens to vote for a specific candidate in an upcoming elections). Furthermore, Yunis (2018) explains how Aristotle rationalizes that in deliberative rhetoric, orators can use three different appeals that will help them persuade their audience to act in a certain way. The first appeal Aristotle defined is ethos. This appeal entails the establishment of trust between the audience and the speaker through convincing the audience that the speaker is credible, at least on the topic being discussed. The second appeal is logos, that is, reasoning through the use of language, sometimes referred to as the logical appeal. While logic and reasoning may seem as 'the same thing', reasoning is more complicated as correct and false logic may be appealing to the audience. And finally, pathos, that is, the appeals to emotions that are made by the orator to stimulate or trigger specific emotions that might help the orator achieve a specific goal. These goals, as will be reviewed shortly, may be visible or invisible to the audience. 
	Additionally, Takens and Van Hoof (2011) theorize that it is not only the quality of rhetoric that determines the persuasion effects of the political messages, but also the topics (issues) being discussed play a significant role in the persuasion process. For example, both campaigns (Trump 2016 and Vote Leave) used "slander, lying and verbal abuse to make their case" (Schmidt, 2017, p. 260). Strategies such as lying was not the only strategy employed by the two campaigns to persuade voters but also strategies such as throwing consequential accusations on opponents to put them in a defensive position (Schmidt, 2017). Other strategies are used to persuade readers such as the use of negative (attack) ads. Negative ads have the capacity to simulate voters to seek information to prove the accuser either correct or incorrect about their accusations (Borah, 2016). This tactic does not only employ voter-learning as a rhetorical function but also employs agenda-setting as explained by Fallis (2017). This last function (agenda-setting) is one of the main tactics used by both campaigns in 2016 (Norris and Inglehart, 2019).

2.2.6 Political communication in the age of new media
	During the two studied events, both campaigns made use of new-media technologies to reach-out more effectively to voters (Cadwalladr, 2017; Cadwalladr & Glendinning, 2018), especially the younger generations. In the Vote Leave Campaign case, they had created a sub-campaign called BeLeave that was designed to target younger liberal progressive voters (The Guardian, Jun 27, 2018). The communication with voters through social media differs from traditional media in both the approach and the outcomes. This is quite evident in three key differences according to Frankel and Hillygus (2017): the first is that social media allows an almost direct interaction channel between the message creator (campaign) and the voter; the second, the interaction between the campaign and voter is not in a one-way direction as in the traditional media case, or at least, it provides each potential voter on social media the means to directly communicate with the campaign of interest and other voters as well, making it a two-way (if not more) communication process; and finally, many of these social media platforms are monolithic in nature (e.g., email, WhatsApp), meaning that it requires different logics in the way messages are designed and presented to the voters. 
	As illustrated, social media use in campaigning and political communication requires different logics than traditional media sources (e.g., TV, radio and print), at least in some respects. For example, social media allowed for microtargeting on a mass scale and based on clearly defined characteristics (Frankel & Hillygus, 2017), which was something not known in political campaigning even in the early stages of the Internet. Further, Owen (2017) argues that the utilization of new media (social media) has not only led to the creation of a multilayered communication environment between the campaigners and the voters, but also that new media has led to a change in how information it disseminated to the masses. For example, Owen (2017) explains that traditional media such as TV, radio and print were adopting a broadcasting approach, that is, to treat the masses as a one body, however, after new media was used in campaigning and in political communication, message creators began to adopt the narrowcasting approach "where carefully crafted messages target discrete audience segments" (p. 832), this was due to what social media platforms as a digital form of technology provided to collect data about the users, which in turn, helped concerned parties to better understand the audience on an individual level, thus, categorizing citizens to be better targeted with political ads. 
2.2.7 Online political- campaigning, advertising, and disinformation 
	As aforementioned, the design of social media platforms and how people use them results in continuous growth user-data, leading to understanding users on an individualized level, leading to creating personalized ads such as the dark ads (Cadawalladr, 2017 as cited in Alaphilippe et al., 2019). Facebook for example, designed the Lookalike audience tool ("Learn about Lookalike Audiences | Facebook Business Help Centre", 2020)
that allows the targeting of the audience to be conducted based on the predefined characteristics and/or demographics that are much more complicated than previous Facebook targeting methods (Alaphilippe et al., 2019). The lookalike audience tool is a service provided by Facebook for customers that want to reach a certain audience based on predefined trends and is restricted to one country per campaign ("Learn about Lookalike Audiences | Facebook Business Help Centre", 2020). To maximize results from this tool, Facebook asks advertisers to provide them with audience examples ranging between 100 and 50000 Facebook accounts ("Learn about Lookalike Audiences | Facebook Business Help Centre", 2020). By analyzing these examples provided by the customers, Facebook is better able to target new 'similar' Facebook users with advertisements on its platform ("Learn about Lookalike Audiences | Facebook Business Help Centre", 2020).
        Due to the highly personalized nature of the dark ads, this type of ads had different targeting strategies to be more effective. These dark ads did not only appear to the social media users that fall in the targeted audience segment, but also allowed comprehensive digital feedback for message optimization by analyzing the data generated from how the audience interacted with these ads (Alaphilippe et al., 2019). In order to maximize the audience engagement on Facebook advertisements, the Trump 2016 Campaign, for example, made use of 5.9 million ads "to identify and then promote those variants that generated most Facebook engagement" (Alaphilippe et al., 2019, p. 18). Finally, these dark ads characteristics have "helped advertisers [campaigners] from cultivating a certain image through their organic posts, while at the same time they can promote their hidden messages [...]" (Alaphilippe et al. 2019, p. 18). 
	Recently, many scholars have called for the adoption of the terms mis-information, dis-information and mal-information, instead of the "ill-defined" (p. 7) term of 'fake news' (Alaphilippe, 2019). Misinformation refers to factual information (news) that is shared unintentionally, without meaning to cause harm; disinformation, on the other hand, refers to nonfactual information (news) that is deliberately shared to cause harm and/or personal benefit; and finally, malinformation, which refers to factual information (genuine) that was intended to remain private or collected without consent and shared to cause harm (Alaphilippe et al., 2019). For example, pornographic footage that was meant to remain private, hate speech recorded with or without the knowledge of the speaker, or what was considered 'normal' back in time but now is considered racist such as images or video footage of politicians in Western countries wearing 'black face' during their teenage. While distinguishing between the three main types of information disorder might seem obvious, in real life however, distinguishing between them can be of high sophistication as they have a natural tendency to overlap, especially in political campaigns (Alaphilippe et al., 2019). Therefore, this research adopted the term disinformation instead of fake news defined by the European Parliament's High Level Expert Group (HLEG) that defined disinformation as follows: "all forms of false, inaccurate, or misleading information designed, presented, and promoted to intentionally cause public harm or profit"  (Buning et al. 2018 as cited in Alaphilippe et al. 2019, p. 6). 
	Online disinformation in the form of false news can be challenging to readers to naturally identify, making the readers susceptible, one way or another, to it (Zhou and Zafarani, 2018). This is not only for how much disinformation campaigns can spread, but also because of how the content creators utilize "propaganda techniques around linguistic, cultural, and national differences, to create new social barriers and divisions, as well as causing financial and personal damages" (Alaphilippe et al., 2019, p. 7). Some studies that looked for persuasion techniques in disinformation campaigns that were used to enhance their message credibility and were able to identify the main techniques that were implemented in those disinformation campaigns (Alaphilippe et al. 2019). These techniques are: ad hominem, that is, to attack the opponent in a personalized and negative manner instead of attacking the argument; ad nauseam, that is, to constantly repeat a phrase or a slogan so that citizens would adopt it and repeat it in their discourse (e.g., Trump's "chain migration" idea about how people migrate to the US and start to bring in their relatives); cherry picking, that is, to decide to pick specific facts to be presented in an argument while deliberately avoiding other facts to change or distort people's perceptions of a topic (similar to confirmation bias); appealing to strong emotions such as "fear, anger, or prejudice" (p.8); deception, that is, to mislead the readers through false presentation of events; and finally, humor, that is used in a negative way against opponents to ridicule them and/or their policies (Alaphilippe et al., 2019). 
	From part two it can be concluded that populist rhetorical functions are used by populist politicians in their political campaigning advertisements that contain disinformation. These rhetorical functions play a major role in the persuasion process of the reader to convince them to vote for the campaign. The difference between these online ads and the traditional advertisement forms, however, remain in the interactions that occur online between the readers and others. This is due to the role that social media plays in amplifying these sensational media messages.
	





















	 	
3 Methodology and research design



3.1	Methodological approach and units of analysis 
       The research of this project focused, mainly, on the persuasive techniques in the ads of the two campaigns in the UK and the US in 2016. In order to answer the research question, qualitative methods in the form of rhetorical analysis was chosen. Brennen (2017) distinguishes between qualitative and quantitative methods as the former is "interdisciplinary, interpretive, political and theoretical in nature" (p.4). Moreover, one of the features of qualitative methods is that it provides the tools needed to make sense of the constructed reality of a given society (Brennen, 2017), also referred to in the theoretical framework as doxa (Van Belle et al., 2013). Assuming the viewpoint that realities are socially constructed (Brennen, 2017), the language used for communication is likely to mirror these realities because of how language is expected to resonate with the audience targeted by it. Accordingly, this understanding can be achieved by the analysis of words, texts, speeches, slang and so forth. In other words, the analysis of the communication texts in a given society or phenomenon may, indeed, reveal information that will allow better understanding of this society or phenomenon. And therefore, the analysis of the language used in the analyzed ads, as identified earlier by Hall (2013) helped in identifying, first, the persuasion techniques by both campaigns, and second, the commonalities and differences among them.  
       Due to the focus of this thesis, to identify any existing common patterns in populist persuasion techniques in both the UK and the US in 2016 (Vote Leave and the Trump 2016 presidential campaigns), rhetorical analysis was chosen as the chief analysis method. Brennen (2017) describes rhetorical analysis as "particularly appropriate when one is assessing aspects of advertising and public relations, and when persuasion is an integral part of the media text" (p. 216) which justifies the use of this method to conduct this research. For the four cases mentioned by Brennen (2017), advertising, public relations, persuasion, and media texts, they all perfectly apply to the texts analyzed in this research. Starting from the latter, media texts, all the sample units are media texts, either Facebook post ads, or TV ads. For the advertisements and persuasion aspects of the texts, all sample units are political campaign advertisements, and the research question was answered by looking for persuasion techniques in these ads, thus, meeting the conditions mentioned by Brennen (2017). Therefore, rhetorical analysis was considered the best analysis method that would answer the research question. 
       In doing rhetorical analysis, it is essential to take the "relationship between the text, its author or producer, the intended audience and the relevant context for the production and the reception of the text" (p.216) into account (Brennen, 2017). Further, Zachary (2009) explains that in doing rhetorical analysis, it is quite important to understand the context surrounding the text to be able to identify the Aristotelian proofs (logos, pathos, and ethos), and therefore, be able to infer how people would have reacted to it. This is, for example, achieved, under the assumption that rhetoricians - people who wrote texts or speeches mainly for the purpose of persuasion- were well aware not only of the sought events, but also, understood their audience and knew what they want to hear. Accordingly, a researcher doing rhetorical analysis must be able to identify key aspects and events that may affect the waning of a text. In other words, background knowledge of the context surrounding each campaign is important to have a deeper understanding of the real intention behind the text. Therefore, I relied on journalistic sources that would explain if something referred to in the ads was not clear. For example, ads usually do not contain the full story, such as when Trump accuses Clinton with allegations. 
       Zachary (2009) identifies three main approaches to rhetorical analysis. The first one, is the basic or traditional form of analysis, which goes back to the work of individuals such as Aristotle and Cicero until the beginning of the twentieth century. The second approach is called the new rhetoric, this approach has emerged due to the complications resulting from the more extensive use of symbolism that created the need for more sophisticated analysis tools. This new type of analysis was referred to by Burke (as cited in Zachary, 2009) as dramatism. That is, an analytical approach that "requires to view human actions as theatrical, discernible in a pentad of interrelated elements: act, scene, agent, agency, agency and purpose" (p. 74). As explained by Zachary (2009), this approach developed by Burke, has provided the tools to analyze texts and speeches to understand the deeply rooted ideological beliefs of the audience. This was, according to Burke (as cited in Zachary, 2009), because of how people engaged in a specific rhetoric, since people, metaphorically, filter topics based on what he called terministic screens. This was based on the belief that "language does not correspond to reality, but instead, filters and selects" (p.74). Finally, and most importantly, the critical-postmodern approach. This approach is the one used in the analysis of this study for three reasons. Frist, it acknowledges the role that the audience play in creation of a media message (advertisements). Second, it focuses on topics (issues) that are salient or absent in the text. and finally, this approach provides a more critical account of how audience may interact to a given text.
        This approach is the most complicated because it starts from the notion that rhetoric codifies and "perpetuates what counts as real or the truth in society" (Zachary, 2009, p. 75). In other words, the analyst must be able to identify how the different groups in a society may interpret specific events. For example, how a Republican African American vs. a Democrat African American would likely interpret a speech from a Republican or a Democrat politician on an ideological and provocative topic such as abortion or racism. Therefore, a rhetorical analyst must also, in this approach, identify how groups of interest in the audience may react to the speech or text. Moreover, as explained by Brennen (2017), background knowledge about the context of the text and the audience is vital to maximize the probability of fully understanding the text and the intentions behind it, and thus, inferring how it might resonate with different segments in the audience. Furthermore, scholars that adopt this theoretical approach see human knowledge as probable, in terms of how people are persuaded about specific topics and do not assume homogeneity among all studied society members (Zachary, 2009). Also, the theoretical approach of critical postmodernism "marks a radically different way of thinking about truth and reality from those ideas that had dominated scholarly inquiry throughout much of recorded history" (Zachary, 2009, p.75). 
       The rhetorical analysis in this study was done looking not only for the rhetorical appeals in the text, but by adding multiple dimensions that served the purpose of answering the research question. For example, in the UK dataset, the Vote Leave Campaign relied on other companies (Cambridge Analytica and its daughter company Aggregate IQ ) to design advertisements that, allegedly, be assumed to appeal to voters on an individual level, where in the US case, the corresponding ads were Facebook post that were shared with all Facebook members of the Trump official Facebook group. In this example, in the UK Vote Leave ads relied on a more complex method not only in the designing phase, but also the distribution of whom these ads will appear to, and hence, analysis of these advertainments provided a more precise  account of the types of voters the Vote Leave Campaign was appealing to. In the US's corresponding advertisements, because these ads were shared on a collective level, the analysis of it ushered to the issues that were focused on during the Trump 2016 presidential campaign. This difference in the approach to persuade voters in the two cases had varying effects on how the advertisements in both cases were designed and will be illustrated in the results section.
       Throughout strategic and persuasive uses of rhetorical strategies, scholars that use the critical- postmodern approach in rhetorical analysis acknowledge that specific topics can be more prominent than its opposite. Therefore, concepts such as power are seen as inherent in some societies more than other, and thus, is present in their use of language (Zachary, 2009). Additionally, Zachary (2009) sees that any component of the human communication is open for rhetorical analysis as some latent meaning is made using different than the traditional communication objects. For example, (facial) gestures and new communication technologies that depend of signifiers (e.g., emojis) that readers make meaning form as described earlier by Hall (2013). 
3.2 Sampling
       The unit of analysis that composed the sample analyzed in this thesis, consisted of TV and Facebook advertisements/posts that were used by the Vote Leave Campaign and the Trump Campaign in the UK and the U.S. in 2016, respectively. The sampling method that was used to gather the sample was the purposive sampling as described by Babbie (2015). In purposive sampling, the researcher may make judgements about the sample for how it is relevant to answer the research question of the study, and may ignore irrelevant sample units (Babbie, 2015). Besides making judgements about what to include in the sample, this sampling method was used for other reasons. First, because the ads (group one and two) were in two different events and are not identical in the way they were distributed, a uniform sampling approach, in this case, would have not been useful. For example, the Vote Leave dark ads were not visible to all Facebook users (e.g., in a specific Facebook group) and the content of these ads was not publicly known until Facebook revealed them to the British Parliament after the Cambridge Analytica scandal (Cadwalladr & Glendinning, 2018; Lomas, 2018). The corresponding ads from the Trump Campaign (in the form of Facebook posts), on the other hand, were visible to every user that was a member of the Trump official Facebook page. In the case, for example, if certain criteria were pre-set, such as the number of likes on an ad, while this would have been possible in the Trump case, it would have been impossible in the Vote Leave case. Second, data was not provided in terms of how Facebook users interacted with the Vote Leave advertisements. For the TV advertisements however, data was provided in both cases and the selection was based on the availability on the official Vote Leave YouTube channel (only ten ads were found and were used in the sample for group three), and the number of times the TV ads were aired in the Trump case (group four). In the Trump case, the ads found on a website (https://politicaladarchive.org) which provided useful information about every advertisement it included. For example, the number of times the ad was aired, where, number of networks that aired the ad, sponsor, an estimate of the number of views, and most importantly, fact checks on the information it contained. Therefore, the advertisements chosen in group-four to represent the Trump 2016 TV advertisements were based on, in the same order, sponsor (had to be a Trump 2016 Campaign ad), the highest number of ads aired, and whenever present, ads that were fact-checked and contained disinformation. More detailed information is provided for every group as follows.  
3.2.1 Group-one
       The UK was group-one for Facebook advertisements known as the dark ads. These advertisements were handed by Facebook to the British Parliament after the allegations that followed the Facebook/ Cambridge Analytica scandal in 2018 (Lomas, 2018). 
      The ads in this group were selected from both the Vote Leave Campaign, and the BeLeave Campaign. The BeLeave Campaign was a sub-campaign run by the same people that were responsible for the Vote Leave Campaign (The Guardian, Jun 27, 2018). Due to the Vote Leave targeted older generations, and BeLeave targeting younger generations (The Guardian, Jun 27, 2018), ads from both campaigns were included in the sample of group-one. Ultimately, group one for UK's Facebook dark ads was represented by fifteen ads from the Vote Leave file, as the main campaign representing the UK populists, and ten ads to represent the BeLeave campaign, that was also designed by the same company, Aggregate IQ (House of Commons, 2018), a Canadian firm, closely tied to Cambridge Analytica and CLS Group. This has allowed to have a wider view on the rhetorical appeals and techniques that were used in both, interrelated, campaigns. The advertisements were in one file sent from Facebook to the British Parliament. An enclosed letter From the Facebook's UK Head of Public Policy, Rebecca Stimson, indicated that these were the ads ran by the Vote Leave and the BeLeave Campaigns before the event of Brexit (House of Commons, 2018).  The letter also mentioned that Facebook groups of Vote Leave, BeLeave and other related campaigns were designed and run by Aggregate IQ. 
      The ads that represented the Vote Leave Campaign were 15 in total and were chosen purposively from the file. I divided the ads according to the issues agenda they discuss (economy and trade, immigration, NHS, sovereignty, etc.) and chose the ads randomly form these groups. I avoided repetition of the ads based on the topic, and the only exception was in the ads that mentioned different countries that fell in the immigration ads group. This was due to the connotations that would follow each country name (e.g., Turkey, a country with a Muslim majority and a high population).
      Similarly, 10 advertisements were chosen from the BeLeave advertisements file sent from Facebook to the British Parliament. Complying with the methodological guidelines, the number of advertisements in group-one was set to be 25 advertisements in total. Therefore, I decided to make the Vote Leave Campaign ads more than the BeLeave ads for three reasons. First, the Vote Leave Campaign was the main Brexit campaign and, the BeLeave Campaign is one of its creations. Second, the ads provided by Facebook to the British Parliament for the Vote Leave Campaign were more than 200 ads, while the BeLeave ads were less than 30. Thus, providing a strong incentive to make the Vote Leave more represented. Finally, and most importantly, the Vote Leave Campaign was the main focus of this research, and the BeLeave Campaign was of less importance in terms of the size and was used just to notice if there was any difference in terms of how both campaigns communicated with their targeted audience. 
3.2.2 Group-two
      Despite the allegations that the Trump 2016 campaign hired Cambridge Analytica for the same purpose as Vote Leave did -to target voters using dark ads on Facebook (Cadwalladr, 2017), a similar file provided by Facebook to an official body, at the time this research was conducted, could not be found. Therefore, the group two ads were sampled form the Facebook posts that were presented on the official Trump Facebook page. The difference between the two types of ads in group one and two were different in two main aspects. The first is that the group-two ads were, in theory, visible to everyone on the Donald Trump Facebook page, and therefore, did not appear for other Facebook users unless shared by one of the Facebook group members with their friends. Also, the dark ads relied on the Facebook advertising algorithm, the Lookalike audience tool, that helped reach specific people. And while the assumption is that the group-one dark ads were designed to target specific people on Facebook, in terms of having a specific appeal to them, this difference between the two types of ads were assumed not to have a major difference in their creation and the only difference assumed was the effectiveness of the Facebook algorithm. Therefore, the Trump Facebook group posters were chosen to represent the Trump campaign in 2016, especially, that this research was focusing on the populist rhetoric in relation to disinformation, and was aiming at comparing the content of the two campaigns' advertisements, and the Trump Facebook ones were the best available at the time this research was done to represent it. 
      Similar to the sampling in group-one, the corresponding group-two was sampled using purposive sampling. It is important to note here that I had a different strategy to sample this group at the beginning of this project. After failing to find officially investigated ads, I tried to find paid ads on the Facebook ad library (https://www.facebook.com/ads/library/?active_status=all&ad_type=political_and_issue_ads&country=NL), which is supposed to contain information on political paid advertisements to help independent researchers. This attempt failed because the search options were not user-friendly and were over complicated. This did not allow me to find the advertisements I was looking for automatically and had to manually go back page-by-page. Additionally, searching for ads based on keywords and timeframes was not possible. Therefore, I drew the ads analyzed in this thesis from the Trump official Facebook page. 
      Because there was no way to gather all the Facebook post advertisements, I also had to go page-by-page to find relevant advertisements. Advertisements were chosen for the highest number of interactions (likes and comments combined, e.g., 3467 likes + 1435 comments = value), non-repeated advertisement information, and as close as possible to the elections date (November 8th, 2016). This was to ensure that the advertisements represented the campaign in its final stages, which was considered to be the most important. 
      This group consisted of 25 advertisements in total to match the corresponding group-one, and to comply with the methodological guide lines. 
3.2.3 Group-three
      For the two remaining groups, groups-three and four, these two groups represented the TV commercials in both campaigns (Vote Leave and Trump 2016 Presidential Campaign). Group three represented the Vote Leave campaign. This group consisted of 10 of the TV ads that were aired on national television in the UK during the Brexit referendum event in 2016. These ads were found on the official Vote Leave Campaign's YouTube channel as a secondary attempt. The first attempt was to find a reliable source that would provide more data about the advertisements (e.g., number of times aired, estimated views, etc.). Therefore, the TV ads that represented Vote Leave (group three) were sampled using purposeful sampling from YouTube. The sampling process was intended to be on the number of views on YouTube as the main aspect to look for, under the assumption that ads with the highest amount of views and interactions are likely to be the ones that most resonated with the people when it was aired on national TV. During the sampling process, however, only 10 advertisements were found on the official Vote Leave YouTube channel. Therefore, all 10 advertisements were included in this group. 
3.2.4 Group-four
      For group four, that represented the Trump TV ads, this group was sampled from a website that provided fact-checks on the content of the ads (politicalarchive.org). The website did not only provide the ads that were aired during the Trump Campaign, but also provided some additional information that was previously mentioned. 
      Because the Trump campaign involved different phases, such as going through the Republican Party elections process to get the party's nomination, the media messages involved were not the same as in the Vote Leave case. This difference between the two campaigns' TV ads airing strategy was due to the difference between the TV industry in both countries. To illustrate, the UK has a national broadcast, allowing advertisers to reach, theoretically, the whole nation. On the other hand, the TV industry in the US is highly privatized, and the federal government in the US does not subsidize a national broadcast. Therefore, to ensure that the groups three and four are as close as possible, ads in group four were chosen based on the closest it was to the election's day. By focusing on the ads made for the final stage of the elections, the ads selected were automatically designed for the whole country, rather than focusing on ads that were designed for state level purposes. For example, an ad made to target a 'red state' such as Texas, will likely be different than one designed to target a 'blue state' such as California, that is a strong hold for the Republican Party. Finally, ads for group three and for were 20 in total complying with the methodological guidelines. 
3.3 Operationalization
       The operationalization phase consisted of setting a systematic way to measure the concept of persuasion techniques. As reviewed in the theoretical framework, persuasion techniques in the populist communication style are quite clear in some areas. Therefore, some sub-concepts were developed from the theoretical framework to measure the persuasion techniques. What follows sheds light on how persuasion techniques were measured and refers to the authors previously reviewed.   
3.3.1 Text motivation 
        The analysis started off by identifying the text motivation behind the text. In this segment, the sample units were examined for the purpose behind their creation. To ensure that this was conducted in a systematic manner, the outcome of this segment was determined by asking the following questions: who is the producer of this ad? (e.g., the main campaign, or does it refer to a politician such as ads that were signed by Boris Johnson); why was this ad created? (e.g., to set the reader's agenda about an issue such as immigration); where was it used and when?; does the ad appeal to fear? as referred to by Norris and Inglehart (2019); does the ad appeal to people's frustration (economy and income, immigration, culture and religious values)? as referred to by Jarvis (2017); does the ad aim at building authenticity by appealing to emotionalization as referred to by Lilleker (2006)?. By knowing the text motivation, it was easier to define the targeted audience, thus, determining the rhetorical function of the ad. The question about the intended audience was answered as a part of the following segment. 
3.3.2 Advertisement Type
       In this segment the answer to which category the ad falls in was determined based on a predefinition that was made to infer how the audience may receive the ads ((Lilleker, 2006; Belt, 2017). The understanding of the type of ads used and categorizing them according to their overall functions, it was easier to identify the campaign's intentions and strategies, which in turn, is an important part of the persuasion process.
        This process was done in two attempts. The first was an attempt to divide the audience based on their political affiliation, e.g., in the US case, Republicans, Democrats and Float-voters, which refers to undetermined voters. This attempt was problematic for two reasons. The first, because of how divisive this election in the U.S. was in particular, and that many members of a party decided to vote from a candidate from another party. For example, studies found that 4% of Republicans voted for Clinton, and 5% of Democrats have voted for Trump (PEW research center, 2018). While this percentage seems to be small, it suggests that readers can be critical about the information they receive in political communication and from the media. Second, While Hillary Clinton, Trump's opponent, was an active member of the Democratic Party and held an official title in the federal government, Trump on the other hand, was only a member of the Republican Party, unlike Clinton, with no official political role, making him an 'outsider'. This difference between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton in terms of being involved in the political system, in addition to Trump being a populist candidate, has mad the categorization of the audience troubling in terms of the results of this particular part of the analysis. 
        The UK example illustrates better the logic behind this choice. In the first attempt, the audience were divided based also on their political affiliation to so that the UK dataset would match its counterpart dataset from the U.S. This was also problematic in terms of the outcome of the analysis. The audience at first were divided into Conservatives, members of the Conservative Party; Labors, members of the Labor Party, that forms with the Conservative Party the two main pillars of the UK political system; and, the float-voters, members of other minor Parties and/ or those with no clear political affiliation. This was also problematic learning that both Boris Johnson, the leader of the Vote Leave Campaign was a Conservative, working against the Remain Campaign, that was led by David Cameron the UK Prime Minister at the time, who was also a Conservative. Which suggests that there were two wings inside the Conservative Party that had different visions for the UK's future in the EU. Therefore, similarly, as in the US case, I chose to divide the audience, not based on their political affiliation, but rather, to their individual take on the Brexit referendum. This resulted in categorizing the audience in the UK into Brexiteers, people that are strongly in favor of the UK leaving the EU, also described as Eurosceptics (Hobolt, 2016); non-Brexiteers, people that are not in favor of the UK leaving the EU and want it to Remain; and finally, float-voters, those who do not have strong opinions about Brexit and were still making their decision about what to vote.
        The following of this second categorization logic, - I found, has led to a more useful account of how people in both countries would receive the ads, and thus, allowed to infer in a more reliable manner what the ads creators were intending during the creation of the ads from it. This was particularly useful while analyzing advertisements when the attacks launched were indirect, at least to one or more of the described audience categories. For example, the Vote Leave ads that mentioned other countries names claiming that they will join the EU, and making comparisons between the annual wages in the UK and these countries, to a Brexiteer, this ad is likely to be considered an advocacy ad because of how the attack is left for the reader to infer based on their personal background.
       The ads fell in one out of three categorize as defined by Lilleker (2006). The following questions determined which category the ads fell into. Who the subject of the ad? (Sponsor/ opponent/ both). In the case of the ad focusing on the sponsor, the ad is marked as an advocacy ad; if the ad is focused on the opponent, the ad is marked as a negative ad; in the case where the ads focuses on both and in making comparisons, the ad is coded as a contrast ad.
3.3.3 Text analysis
       The next stage was to conduct the text analysis. In this stage, the text content of the Facebook ads and the TV ads were analyzed for their rhetorical appeals as a means to persuading readers. This analysis was conducted in a theoretically informed manner. For example, the text would be analyzed by looking for the three rhetorical proofs of logos, ethos, and pathos as mentioned by Yunis (2018). To illustrate, the analysis was conducted by looking in every sentence for a rhetorical appeal. To make the analysis as systematic as possible, a set of questions were answered, and the answers determined the latent or manifest rhetorical appeals. This was particularly useful in the cases where the rhetorical appeals were not clear. For example, in some cases, it was not clear enough if the author -agent- was appealing to emotions (pathos) or reasoning (logos) from the first round of coding, and the guiding question helped determine which appeal was more salient. 
       Table 1: How to measure rhetorical appeals
Rhetorical appealQuestionsExampleEthosDoes the agent appeal to speaker credibility? (Yes/No), If yes, how?Does the agent appeal to speaker authority? (Yes/No), If yes, what?Does the agent provide important information?To accuse the opponent in passed events.PathosDoes the agent appeal to emotions?What emotions does the agent appeal to?Nationalism: the use of words that imply inclusion such as: we, us, let's, etc.LogosDoes the agent appeal to reasoning?What idea/s the agent is conveying to the reader?       
       Initially, I tried Atlas.ti software to conduct the analysis of the sample. Due to that I was not able to categorize the measured sub-concepts during the analysis, I started to upload the Facebook advertisements on Word Office and made a table to include the concepts. This was a better solution; however, it was still insufficient in terms of including all the concepts in one table. Therefore, I used Office Excel. Then, I assigned a code for every advertisement that corresponds to its group and sequence. For example, advertisement number 2.14, the first number (2) indicates that the advertisement falls in group-two (Trump Facebook advertisements), and the second number (14) indicates the advertisement's sequence in its group.  
3.3.4 Visual analysis
       The next analysis method was the visual analysis, that together with the text analysis, forms the multimodal analysis for the Facebook ads in group one and two. Due to the size of this thesis, this was not conducted in groups three and four, unless something significant needed to be added. The visual analysis examined the images that complimented the text present in the Facebook ads. The analysis started by looking first at what is in focus in the image, then looked at the background that might be blurred but still have some meaning, for example, a blurred American flag or the EU flag. The combination of the rhetorical analysis of the text and the visual analysis resulted in identifying the presented appeals in these ads. In some cases, the focus was on one rhetorical appeal, this was especially present in the ads that had a strong nationalistic appeal (pathos), e.g., an American flag behind Trump. 
3.3.5 Rhetorical strategies
The next step was to identify the salient rhetorical strategies in the text. These rhetorical strategies are part of the persuasion techniques used with readers. This was done by weighing and identifying the types of arguments present in the text to determine its logic. This helped in identifying the seven rhetorical strategies that are usually present in online disinformation campaigns as identified by Alphillipie et al. (2018). The first form of arguments is the deductive argument. This type of arguments is structured in a way where if the premises are true, the conclusion must be true (Goel, Gold, Kapur & Houle, 1997). For example, if A=B, and B=C, therefore, A=C. This is the simplest form of a deductive argument. Deductive arguments can be valid or invalid arguments. A valid argument is a sort of deductive arguments where the correctness of the premises determines the correctness of the conclusion of the argument. For example, Tom is a man. All men are mortal. Therefore, Tom is mortal. This argument is valid because the premises used are true. On the other hand, invalid arguments are the ones that have the structure of a deductive argument, however, contain false reasoning because the premises are not true. For example, all those who like fishing are alive. Mark is alive. Therefore, Mark likes fishing. In this argument the premises are correct, however, the conclusion does not fall logically from the argument, therefore, the argument is invalid. Further, a deductive argument can be a sound or an unsound argument (Fohr, 1979). For a deductive argument to be sound, all premises of the argument must be true, and the argument is valid (Fohr, 1979). For example, Rotterdam is in the Netherlands. Sarah is in Rotterdam. Therefore, Sarah is in the Netherlands. This argument is a sound argument because the premises are true and valid. An argument can be valid but unsound, for example, Rotterdam is in Belgium. Sarah is in Rotterdam. Therefore, Sarah is in Belgium. This argument is valid because the conclusion falls logically from the premises. However, the first premise is not true that Rotterdam is in Belgium. Therefore, the argument is not sound.
Another type of arguments is the inductive arguments. Inductive arguments are the ones built on the notion that the strength of the premises increases the likelihood of having a correct conclusion (Fohr, 1979). For example, eleven apples out of twelve in the bag are red apples. Tom will pick an apple at random from the bag. Therefore, Tom will pick a red apple. This is an example of an inductive argument that is also a strong argument. However, the strength of an argument is relative from a person to another and is determined according to prior beliefs (Fohr, 1979). Furthermore, inductive arguments, including to being strong or weak arguments, they can be cogent or non-cogent arguments. For an argument to be cogent, it has to have true premises and the premises must be strong (Fohr, 1979). For example, most people in the Netherlands like eating fries. Rotterdam is in the Netherlands. Therefore, a randomly chosen person in Rotterdam will like fries. The use of the word most indicates that not all people in the Netherlands like fries, thus, not making an absolute generalization. Also, the argument is built in a way to convince the interpreter that there is a high probability due to that most of the people in the Netherlands like fires. Therefore, increasing the chance of convincing the interpreter with the argument by increasing the likelihood of the premises. Therefore, this argument is strong and cogent. 
	By identifying the type or arguments used in the advertisements, I was able to identify some of the rhetorical strategies in the advertisements. Lying, is a common rhetorical strategy in online disinformation (Alphillipie et al, 2019). By identifying type of argument and then identifying the correctness of the premises, it was easier to identify rhetorical strategies such as lying. While most ads were categorized as disinformation in the two studied cases, this form of analysis helped identify other rhetorical strategies that were interwoven with lying (e.g., cherry picking and ad hominem.

3.3.6 General tone
	For the general tone used in the ads, this was determined according to the choice of words, and/or tone. For example, does the text address the readers in a formal manner? This was determined by the language used in the text. For example, does the advertisement address the readers collectively? (if the answer is yes, the ad would been coded as using a formal tone). Also, the general tone determined by the tone voice that was used in terms of the first/second or third person. Finally, does the agent speak using words that imply inclusion such as we, us, our, and own? and so on and so forth. Identifying the general tone helped in supporting the rhetorical appeals analysis of the text. For example, the use of the formal tone sometimes indicated the use of (knowledge) authority appeals (ethos).

3.3.7 Counterevidence
	Next, was the look for counter evidence in both the texts and the visuals. The main focus was to find if any component of the ad may imply a different interpretation or appeal differently than the one that is most salient, and therefore, was labeled to the text or visual as counterevidence. 

3.3.8   Thematic analysis
	Thematic analysis is one of the qualitative research methods that allows finding patterns and meanings in texts that would otherwise be invisible (Boeije, 2010). Furthermore, it allows to capture explicit and implicit themes in a text (Braun and Clarke, 2006; Boeije, 2010). I decided to add thematic analysis as a second aryanalysis method to support the results for the rhetorical analysis when applicable and was conducted for the Facebook ads only (groups one and two). This was due to the size of this project and to the large size of the TV ads analyzed.
        Thematic analysis in this research was conducted by applying the Grounded Theory approach. That is, to drive the analysis from what emerges from the data rather than existing literature (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). In other words, the analysis was done in an inductive manner in which the codes emerge from the data. Unlike the rhetorical analysis where the analysis is conducted in a deductive way by looking for the specific features of the persuasion proofs (ethos, logos, and pathos) or techniques that are theoretically informed. The combination of the two methods, rhetorical analysis and thematic analysis, was chosen for the purpose of comparing the analysis outcome, a process known as triangulation (Silverman, 2011). This according to Silverman (2011) may increase the credibility of the research results.
       
	Open coding
	The thematic analysis started in its first phase by capturing the main theme, if present, in every sentence of the text (Boeije, 2010). Furthermore, open coding of the text "is the process of 'breaking down, examining, comparing, conceptualizing and categorizing data'" (Strauss & Corbin, 2007 as cited in Boeije, 2010, p. 96). This phase started by reading the text to start the emerging process within the data (Boeije, 2010). This helped me getting familiar with the data being analyzed and therefore, be more aware of it. Next, the text was reread while paying attention to every theme present in, if any, in every sentence (Boeije, 2010). This phase resulted in open codes that represent the main themes/ ideas that were present either explicitly or implicitly in the data (Boeije, 2010). 
	Axial coding
	This is the second phase of the analysis. Boeije (2010) rationalizes the axial coding by acknowledging that "the primary purpose of axial coding is to determine which elements in the research are dominant ones and which are less important ones" (p. 109). This phase has allowed not only to illeminate the redundant	open codes that may have emerged in the first round of coding, but also allowed to find common themes that together start defining thematic patterns in the data. This phase resulted in thematic categories that were constructed from the open codes that were found to be relevant in answering the research question. 
	Selective coding
	The third and final phase is known as selective coding. This phase aims at defining any present relationships between the dominant themes that were previously identified and any possible concepts or main themes. This, Boeije (2010) argues, is achieved by identifying repetitive themes, the main messages present in the data, and how they relate to each other. 
	The coding process was done on all four predefined groups separately, and the results of every group was compared the corresponding group. This helped define the shared themes that were present in the four groups. By doing so, I was able to compare what each campaign focused on in their messages. In turn, this revealed the general topics that shaped the major media strategy of each campaign.
3.4  Reliability, validity and credibility
	
3.4.1 Credibility
	Under the title "Critics of scientific credibility" (p. 353), Silverman (2011) weighted the arguments made against the credibility of qualitative research. For example, critics argue, according to Silverman (2011), that due to that scholars getting involved in a personal and intensive manner in the analysis process of qualitative data, which in turn, ultimately affects the credibility of the scholar's work. Silverman (2011) concluded that this claim is paradoxical and refuted it because this personal and intensive involvement also applies to quantitative research, regardless of the methodology, and if to be taken to be true, makes the notion of research, redundant. 
       In this thesis, I was heavily overwhelmed with the sample for several reasons. First, coming from the Middle East, and not being in the countries where the two events happened, I was only receiving information from media outlets. Because media outlets have editorial policies that reflected on the content they produced, this entailed that my understanding of the events was in a way or another affected by these media outlets' opinions expressed by their commentators. In other words, my personal construction of events, may relatively been affected by the construction of others related to the two campaigns. Therefore, I do indeed believe that this might have had an effect where I was, subconsciously and unintentionally, biased against the two campaigns. I have adopted some ethical guidelines developed by Scott (1967) that I assumed will, in a systematic way, lower the chances of personal bias to reflect negatively on the analysis of the sample. These guidelines will be presented shortly. Secondly, the lack of knowledge is relative, and when present, might easily distort the outcome of the analysis. What is problematic about the lack of knowledge is that a researcher is likely not be aware of it when it happens. The aforementioned ethical guideline had helped me overcome, I assume, many of the times where things were not clear, because I had to look for outside sources (journalistic) to eliminate as much as I can the lack of knowledge. More illustration on this point will follow. 
3.4.2 Validity 
	Validity refers to the extent to which the measurement of the data is accurate (Silverman, 2011). In other words, how accurate is the analysis process accurate in measuring the data in the way it was intended to. Furthermore, Silverman (2011) assessed the notion of qualitative research validity and concluded that due to the interpretive nature of the data in qualitative research, including quantitative research, validity in qualitative research is, to various degrees, achievable. Moreover, the use of triangulation in the form of combining both rhetorical and thematic analysis provided a more structural approach and deeper insight during the analysis.
        Finally, it is important to note here, that Silverman (2011) pointed out, among other things, to the role that the researcher's personal values play in the process of interpreting data. Giving the nature of the datasets of this research being connected to populist groups from the UK and the US that are known for being hostile, in their discourse, against people that come from certain regions (e.g., South America, Asia, Africa, the Middle East, etc.), ethnicities (e.g., Black or Brown), religious groups (e.g., Muslims and Jews), it was clear to myself that personal bias might reflect consciously or unconsciously on the interpretation of the sample. 
       Populist politicians, especially those that hold authoritarian values such as Donald Trump, tend to gain political power over their opponents by agitating the masses against the political establishment in a country (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). My personal view on democracy extends beyond people's vote to the unwritten social contracts of mutual living. I adopt the definition of democracy by Norris and Inglehart (2019) where these unwritten social agreements in a democratic society includes mutual tolerance, culture of acceptance, and is a society that is constantly keen to protect itself from extremist culture/s. Also, I see democracy as a system in which ethnic and religious minorities are protected and are empowered to live a 'normal' life including, among other things, the participation in the political system. This entails that the society, as I see it, should reject populist movements that holds authoritarian values (e.g., xenophobia) that constantly focus their hate speech on specific groups in order to gain political power. 
       During the analysis of the sample, I indeed encountered some ads that used, what I consider, hate speech against others. I tried as much as I could to be aware of this, and not making my personal views on democracy affect the interpretation of the sample. 
3.4.3 Reliability
	"Reliability refers to the degree to which the findings of a study are independent of accidental circumstances of their production" (Kirk & Miller, 1986 as cited in Silverman, 2011, p. 360). In other words, reliability in qualitative research is related to both the measurements used in the analysis, and therefore, to what extent the study is replicable; and the circumstances that may affect the interpretation. For example, a scale that gives the same measurement for the same person every time is a reliable scale. Assuming no other changes in the person's weight, and that the scale is correct, or, valid. And because qualitative research is different than scales, according to Moisander and Valtonen (2006) as cited in Silverman (2011), a qualitative researcher should be transparent about the analysis process so the reader of the research report would be able to judge how reliable the findings of the research are. Furthermore, a researcher should make explicit their theoretical stance on topics that emerge during the analysis by paying attention to the used theoretical framework. Therefore, I have relied on the guidelines developed by Scott (1967) in his thesis, rhetoric as epistemic, to remedy any personal biases, lack of knowledge or other inside or outside factors that might risk the integrity and reliability of the interpretation of the sample. 

3.4.4 Rhetoric-as-epistemic 
	Such concerns discussed in the reliability section were also at the center of Scott's (1967) essay titled 'On viewing rhetoric as epistemic'. As just mentioned, I relayed on the guidelines developed by Scott (1967) that, realistically, if applied, safeguards, to a large extent, the reliability of a research that rhetorical analysis is its main analysis method. Scott (1967) argued that knowledge is never certain and, absolute certainty is not achievable due to different factors. For example, he stated facts such as that knowledge can be limited, partial and changing. Also, he pointed that rhetoric is usually involved in debates that is naturally involved in struggle, conflict and disagreement. Therefore, Scott (1967) concluded that rhetoric is contingent and thus, no matter how systematic the analysis of the text is, it will contain flaws. Accordingly, Scott (1967) defined a set of ethical guidelines that will improve the rhetorical analysis of a studied text. The ethical guidelines provided by Scott (1967) are as follows: toleration, that is, to be open for the best possible interpretation in favor of the author of the text, he explains " on the other hand, uncertainty, taking truth as a toehold to climb into the yet-to-be-created rather than is a program to unfold regardless of the circumstances, demands toleration" (p.16). The next guideline is will, that is the intention one has to learn and act, or as Scott (1967) puts it "if one cannot be certain, however, then one must either withdraw form conflicts of life or find some way to act in the face of these conflicts" (p. 16). Finally, responsibility, that is, that one must be responsible to "make his acts the best possible" (p. 17) in the case of working in uncertain situations. These ethical guidelines were implemented during the analysis of the texts to ensure, on the most basic level, avoiding personal bias as much as possible.









5 Results
	In this section, I underscore the rhetorical techniques and functions, including the rhetorical appeals, used by each campaign in the sample. Then, I review the results of the thematic analysis that answer the main research question of this thesis. First, it is important to note that the majority of the ads analyzed have been fact-checked by independent and/or official bodies and were categorized as containing disinformation news. 
5.1 	Group 1
	Rhetorical techniques
	Rhetorical functions
       Group one consisted of the dark ads on Facebook from both the Vote Leave Campaign and the BeLeave Campaign analyzed to answer the sub-question: What were the rhetorical techniques used by the Vote Leave Campaign during the Brexit referendum in the UK in 2016 in their Facebook advertisements?
	The answer to this question was determined by several factors that took place during the analysis phases. The rhetorical functions of the ads in this group centered around setting the reader's agenda about how harmful the EU was to the UK. This was done in the attempt to persuade the reader that the EU is a 'corrupt system' that is severely harming the UK on many levels. The final conclusion about this group is that the Vote Leave Campaign relied heavily on rhetorical techniques that provided short and focused information that stroke certain cords. The main rhetorical technique was the emotionalization of the reader's experience (nationalism and anger) to mobilize the public opinion in the UK against the EU, mainly by feeding people's anger in terms of controversial topics. By doing so, the Vote Leave Campaign was likely aiming at 1) establishing trust with the readers by showing themselves as caring for and on the same side as the voters, thus providing reason why the voters should trust the campaign and that the UK should leave the EU; and 2) shaping the reader's perception that the EU is a burden on the UK in the form of deregulating immigration, restricting the UK's sovereignty, draining its economy and diminishing its younger generations' future opportunities.  
	The advertisements were also focused on feeding the reader's negativity bias and appealed to certain strong emotions. The short and focused information that discussed topics of high sophistication such as immigration that entails ideology, culture and economy were deliberately discussed in a superficial and an abstract style. The feeding of the negativity bias was linked to the immense use of first-order principles in the advertisements and during the absence of reliable information about second-order principles.  
Figure 1: example of the multimodal analysis (kindly zoom in to be able to read content)

	Type of advertisements
 	To non-Brexiteers and float-voters, the ads were remarkably negative (attack) advertisements. The use of negative ads was linked to the first aim of establishing trust with the reader by ushering the reader to the negative impacts of the EU on the UK in a direct or indirect way. Negative ads in group-one seemed to focus the attacks related to economy and UK taxpayers' money on three different levels. The first level was to attack the integrity of the EU by targeting the integrity of the very people that compose the EU itself (officials and bureaucrats). The aim of the attacks launched on this level were likely to create and/or feed the UK citizens' anger on economic grounds which entailed the extensive use of appeals to reasoning (logos), and the strong emotions of anger, fear, and prejudice (pathos). For example, ads 1.14 and 1.15.








Figure 2: ad 1.14

 



Figure 3: ad 1.15


        The second level was to target the EU also based on economy and tax money; however, the attacks were in an indirect way. The aim of these ads was apparently to create public anger against the EU like on the first level but added a layer of sophistication by adding the immigration topic to it. By adding the immigration topic to these ads, the agent (content creator) was likely aiming at feeding the reader's negativity bias, fear and prejudice. The main rhetorical appeals were reasoning (logos), explicitly, and emotions (pathos) of fear and anger, implicitly. For example, in ads 1.6, 1.7 and 1.8.
       
       Figure 4: ad 1.6 
       Figure 5: ad 1.7
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       Figure 6: ad 1.8
       
       
       The third level were also indirect attack ads on the EU that asked the UK citizens to stop sending the UK money to the EU or potential EU countries, and that this is achieved by the UK leaving the EU which will allow the UK government to spend their money on the UK citizens instead. The aim of this set of ads was to appeal to the UK citizen's reasoning (logos) by contrasting their own interest against the interest of the people of EU member states or yet-to-be member states. In this level, the appeal to nationalism and anger (pathos) were the most salient, parallelly, was the appeal to reasoning (logos). For example, in ad 1.2 "LET'S GIVE THE NHS THE £350 MILLION WE HAND OVER TO THE EU EVERY WEEK [in the background a crowded hospital with a doctor that seems to be form a Middle Eastern decent, looking in charge while what seems to be a Caucasian British doctor with a stethoscope is at the counter doing administrative work which gives the reader a sense of chaos in the British health system (NHS) due to its membership in the EU. A faded image of the administrative workers that appear to be two Muslim females wearing Hijab to appeal to anger against immigration in the UK due to the membership of the EU]".
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       Figure 7: ad 1.2
       
        Also, in ad 1.3 the agent is both appealing to knowledge authority (ethos) by mentioning figures, and to reasoning (logos) by providing alternative solutions to what they portray as problems in the face of the UK "STOP sending £350 million to the EU every single week. Spend it on our priorities instead. [ The EU flag faded in the background]".
       Figure 8: ad 1.3
       
        Similarly, in one of the BeLeave Campaign ads (1.25) "We send £10 billion to the EU every year. Let's spend it on out priorities instead. [In the background an image that seems to be taken from the iconic London Bridge looking over the London Eye, Big Ben and other historical buildings of London such as the British Parliament, in an attempt to appeal to nationalism (pathos)]".
       Figure 9: ad 1.25
       
       Rhetorical appeals
       Here I review the results of the multimodal analysis of the texts and visuals of the ads analyzed.
       It is important to note here that the appeal to credibility (ethos) was intertwined and was always used in combination with other appeals. The appeal to speaker credibility (ethos) was not repeated in the ads as much as the other two appeal (logos and pathos), however, due to the inherent rhetorical function of the ads serving as enthymemes, the light use of knowledge authority (ethos) was considerably focused and perhaps, effective. Enthymeme is understood here as the absence of a premise in the argument that the agent assumes the reader is aware of regardless of their agreement or disagreement on the topics discussed and, is a form of deductive reasoning with the reader that allows the agent to make unsupported claims (Yunis, 2018). Therefore, the appeals to speaker credibility (ethos), especially in the form of appealing to knowledge authority was, despite of the limited use, an effective way to communicate with Brexiteers on one side, and float-voters on the other. The effectiveness of knowledge authority on Brexiteers was for the rhetorical function of feeding confirmation bias, because of the information it provided, and on float-voters by attempting to shape their perceptions about how reliable the Vote Leave Campaign politicians are form one side, and their perceptions on the topics discussed on the other. In other words, the agent used the credibility appeals (ethos) in a propagandist manner to create social barriers between UK voters on the aforementioned main topics (economy, immigration and UK's future in the EU) between the three categories of voters. 
       For the ads that appealed to fear about the future were mainly the ads made by the BeLeave Campaign that were set to target the younger voters. The use of fear appeals, however, was not straightforward, especially when combining the texts with the background images on the ads. In these ads, the agent used negative texts in combination with positive background images, which was confusing in the multimodal analysis phase (e.g., ad 1.17).  The appeal to emotions (based on topics) were complemented with appeals to reasoning (logos). It was common among the BeLeave Campaign ads that it did not contain any direct slogans or instructions that urged the reader's to 'vote leave'. These ads were likely designed as a window to draw the readers' attention to specific topic (agenda-setting). Markable in these ads is how they also were used for voter-learning. For example, in ad 1.16 "We should make our laws, not far away, unelected bureaucrats. [click link to] LEARN MORE [in the background a large leg wearing the Union Jack flag kicking a small sized man holding the EU flag in his hands]". The use of words such as (we and our) were used to give the reader a sense of collectivity and appeals to nationalism.
       
       Figure 10: 1.16
       
       
        Also, in ad 1.17 "We need an immigration system that ensures British young people more jobs [click the link] I AGREE [in the background a young brown British female that looks from a different origin smiling while being in a metro train]" (own emphasis). Similarly, ad 1.22 "The EU is restricting us from unleashing the kind of innovation which creates jobs and grows our economy [a man looking like a businessman holding a briefcase while chained to an iron ball that has the EU flag]" (own emphasis). Besides the light emotionalization function of these ads, the main function appeared to be agenda setting and voter-learning.

       Figure 11: ad 1.17
       
        The deference of the language used between the Vote Leave Campaign advertisements and the BeLeave Campaign advertisements is that the latter were attempting to reason with the younger generations more than directing them -even if it contained disinformation- while the former were more instructive for the older generations to leave the EU. This deference in the language used marked the different political strategies employed to communicate with the different generations of voters, thus, marking the different approaches of ad design. In other words, the BeLeave Campaign ads were more advocacy ads than negative ads due to the type of audience they were appealing to. Moreover, the BeLeave ads seemed to be more effective in voter-learning because it functioned on two levels. The first is the visible ad with the information it conveyed; the second was the button containing the hyperlink (e.g., "LEARN MORE") which allowed the reader to move to another webpage that contained more information about the topic discussed in the original ad. On the other hand, while the Vote Leave ads also contained hyperlink buttons, they were mostly corresponding to the information provided in the ads itself (e.g., "JOIN ME, VOTE LEAVE" or "STOP THE EU NOW!"), thus, the agent seemed to assume that the reader is already in agreement with the information provided on the ads of the Vote Leave Campaign ads, thus, seemed to assume the reader was in consent with the information provided. 
       Finally, while Both Vote Leave and BeLeave campaigns were related and led by the same people, it was clear from the advertisements in group-one that the Vote Leave Campaign ads were much more negative (attack) ads than the BeLeave ones.
        Thematic analysis
       The thematic analysis of Facebook advertisements in group-one revealed the main messages the Vote Leave Campaign and its sub-campaign BeLeave focused on during their campaigning through the Brexit event. These topics were categorized under the selective codes national threats and UK's future. The two selective themes correspond to the results of the multimodal rhetorical analysis of this group on how the ads were used to set the reader's agenda around specific topics in order to mobilize the public opinion in the UK against the EU. The prioritizing of these topics reinforces the notion that the Vote Leave Campaign aimed at emotionalizing the reader's experience to win them on their side, and thus, gain political support despite that the initial codes of this group at first sight revealed the strong reasoning aspect of the ads.
       National threats
       Ads in group-one suggest that the EU possesses national threats to the UK and its own sovereignty. These threats pointed to by the Vote Leave Campaign were in the form of unregulated immigration, EU restrictions on various levels, and the lack of control over laws imposed by the European Parliament set by "unelected bureaucrats" (ad. 1.16). 
       By framing the EU as a threat, the Vote Leave Campaign framed the EU as negative, harmful and is in conflict with the UK's interest. This anti-European sentiment that likely sought to scotomize the Brexiteers and float-voters against the non-Brexiteers not only by emotionalizing the reader's experience but also by blocking information about the benefits the UK gets in return of its membership in the EU.
        The emotionalization of the readers were identified based on the topics the ads discussed. This emotionalization was mainly on two levels. The first was nationalistic in nature. For example, regaining control which was one of the highly repeated themes and was not only repeated in the Vote Leave Campaign's slogan "Vote Leave, Take Control" or "Vote Leave, Take Back Control", but also in the content of the ads. In ad 1.12 "Immigration must be controlled by those who the public elect and not the EU! On the 23 June they will get their chance to take back control". This ad also provides a good example of how the topics discussed in the ads were multidimensional as the ad discussed immigration, lack of control on laws, and regaining control. Also, the same ad encapsulates how first-order principles were used. 
       The second level of emotionalization was framing the EU as a source of constant threat. For example, in ad 1.6, 1.7, 1.8 and 1.9 that aimed to raise the readers' levels of anxiety and fear. 
       Table 2: Thematic analysis codes 
Selective themeAxial codeInitial codesSelective themeAxial codeInitial codeNational threatsSovereignty Recovering controlUK's FutureEconomic futureEconomy and tradeEU threatTax money abuse Immigration controlSpending prioritiesEU restrictionsEconomic priorities

British international relationsSelective ThemeAxial codeInitial codeUK's futurePeople's future British youth futurePersonal growthYoung Immigrants

       UK's future
       The second selective theme that emerged from the data was suggested by the immense focus on how the UK would look like outside of the EU. The campaign -especially the BeLeave Campaign ads, focused of showing a bright image of the UK outside of the EU. This was attributed to the targeted audience of this sub-campaign in the first place. This theme was mainly used in the ads that seemed more positive to the Brexiteers, while slightly seemed to be attack ads for the non-Brexiteers and float-voters. 
       The emotionalization of the readers through framing a bright UK's future outside the EU was of high frequency in the BeLeave ads, which was also attributed to the age segment that this campaign targeted. 
	 
	
5.2 Group two
       Rhetorical techniques
       Group two consisted of the Facebook's post advertisements that were available on the official Donald Trump Facebook Page. These ads were analyzed to answer the sub-question:
what were the rhetorical techniques used by the Trump presidential campaign during the United States Presidential Elections in 2016 in their Facebook posts advertisements?
	Rhetorical functions
	The rhetorical functions of these ads centered also around setting the readers agenda about certain topics and, feeding both negativity and confirmation bias. The agenda-setting technique was used to persuade the readers that Donald Trump is credible enough -by appealing to knowledge authority (ethos)- to become president of the U.S. and 'bring back the American glory'; the other side of the agenda-setting was done by focusing the ads, sometimes specified and the others more general and abstract, on issues with Hillary Clinton in terms of personal ability and integrity. Voter-learning was an essential part of the ads that attacked Clintons ability and integrity, at least in the ads that contained more specified information. By doing so, the Trump 2016 Campaign was likely aiming at: 1) shaping the reader's perception about Clinton as an 'insider politician' that is corrupt and lacks ability to perform the presidential tasks; and simultaneously 2) build the credibility of Trump as a trustworthy candidate that would be able to perform the presidential tasks. 
       It is important to note here that in this group, the rhetorical functions (voter-learning, emotional appeals, and agenda-setting) were highly interwoven, and were all employed in the negative (attack) ads that will be reviewed shortly. 
	The final conclusion about this group is that: 1) the Trump campaign weaponized these ads to launch strong personal attacks on Hillary Clinton on several levels from one side; and 2) to build Trump's image as a trustworthy candidate from the other. 
	Type of advertisements
         More than half of the ads were explicit attack ads to all readers' categories (pro-Trump, pro-Hillary, and float-voters). Unlike the attack on an official body in group-one (EU), the attacks in group-two were personalized against Clinton on many levels. The first level was the attack on Clinton's personal ability to hold office. This was in the attempt to persuade the reader that Clinton is not able to perform the tasks the presidential office entails. For example, ad 2.4 "HILLARY'S ACCOMPLISHMENTS AT THE STATE DEPARTMENT[:] WEAK Iran Deal [,] FAILED Russia Reset [,] FAILED Libya Intervention [,] FAILED Iraq Strategy [,] FAILED Pivot to Asia [,] SHADY Contracts [,] LACK OF ACCOUNTABILITY [,] CONFLICTS of Interest [,] NO TRANSPARENCY". 
       Figure 12: ad 2.4
       
	The second level was to attack Hillary Clinton's integrity. This level was likely aiming at discrediting Clinton, and therefore, directing the reader to question if Clinton is the right choice to become the president of the U.S. Also, these ads were likely designed in this way for two reasons. First, to shape the reader's perception about Clinton as a corrupt and selfish politician. Such as in the last ad (2.4) that also attacked Clinton's personal integrity. Second, as Donald Trump was, back then, new to politics with no official office experience, he was discrediting Clinton by focusing on what he thought is true about her abuse of power for personal gains. For example, in ad 2.10 "Hillary Clinton is an insider supported by powerful insiders ---ATTACKING AMERICANS--- who have absolutely no political power [signed] -DONALD J. TRUMP [the complementary visual is a cropped image of Hillary's face having estrange gestures]" (own emphasis). Additionally, "ATTACING AMERICANS" appeals to fear (pathos) and by putting all Americans in the face of danger, the Trump campaign is socializing the readers to act as a 'tribe' in the face of that danger as explained by Norris and Inglehart (2019). Also, in ad 2.20 "GRANTED IMMUNITY: THE PEOPLE BEHIND THE EMAIL SCANDAL[.] PAUL COMBETTA [,] CHERYL MILLS [,] BRYAN PAGLIANO [,] HEATHER SAMUELSON [,] JOHN BENTEL [.] WHAT ARE THEY HIDING? #CrookedHillaryStandard [in the visual, small sized photos of the mentioned persons and a larger picture of Hillary Clinton in black-and-white laughing to appeal to fear and anxiety]". 
Figure 13: ad 2.10

       Similarly, ad 2.23 "CLINTON AIDE WHO SET UP SECRET SERVER: PLEADS THE 5TH AMENDMENT [.] RESUSES TO ANSWER QUESTIONS 125 TIMES [.] REFUSES TO COMPLY WITH CONGRESSIONAL SUBPOENA[.] WHAT'S HILLARY HIDING?". Markable, except for one ad, all ads that contained an image of Hillary Clinton were either black-and-white, or grey imagery to appeal to fear and anxiety aligning with Belt (2017).   
	 The third level of attacks were used to ridicule and denounce Clinton and were also used to structure the opposition (Clinton) as 'not fit for office'.  This aligned with the accusations against right-winged politicians as being misogynistic in their discourse (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). By doing so, the agent (Trump 2016 Campaign) was appealing to knowledge authority (ethos). For example, ad 2.1 "SHE HAS BEEN OUT SMARTED ------AND------- OUT PLAYED WORSE THAN ANY PERSON IN ANY GOVERNMENT [signed] DONALD J. TRUMP [in the background an image of Hillary Clinton, in black-and-white, leaning on the lectern to show her in a weak state, referring to her health issues as described by Donald Trump on several occasions]".
Figure 14: ad 2.1

 	Also, in ad 2.2 "You talk but you don't get anything done. [signed] Donald J. Trump [the background is a grey image of Hillary Clinton laughing in the bottom right corner of the ad to appeal to fear and anxiety]". 
       Advocacy ads focused on what Trump has to offer to the American people. For example, in ad 2.13 "Together we can save American Jobs, American Lives, and American futures. [signed] Donald J. Trump." (own emphasis). The repeated use of the word American underscores the extensive appeal to nationalism and fear.  Other ads focused on personal or national security such as ad 2.14 "in the 20th Century, the United States defeated Fascism, Nazism, and Communism. We will defeat radical Islamic terrorism. [signed] Donald J. Trump". Likewise, ad 2.3 "A NATION WITHOUT BOARDERS IS NO A NATION AT ALL. *** WE MUST HAVE A WALL. THE RULE OF LAW MATTERS [signed] DONALD J. TRUMP [an image of Trump standing confident in front of a lectern giving a speech, behind him is the American flag]" (own emphasis). The last two ads did not only appeal to nationalism, but also appealed and assumed the existence of the 'tribe' notion referred to earlier by Norris and Inglehart (2019), mainly because of the appeal to fear and collectivity by using words such as together, we, we will, and defeat. 
       Rhetorical appeals
       The most used appeals were the appeal to credibility (ethos). This appeal, however, was usually used indirectly. As explained earlier, by attacking Clinton, especially on a personal level, the agent (Trump) was appealing to knowledge authority. In other words, instead of the agent stating that the candidate, Donald Trump, is credible for the X and Y reasons, the agent would describe the opponent, Hillary Clinton, as untrustworthy by often putting the veracity of her statements and actions into question.  Due to the agent attacking the opponent, it is likely to be inferred by the reader that the agent is appealing to credibility in a reversed manner. For example, in the aforementioned ads (2.1, 2.2 and 2.4). 
       On the other hand, Trump used the positive ads to build his own credibility in a direct way by appealing, to knowledge authority and leadership respectively. For example, ad 2.7 "DONALD TRUMP IS TAKING THE STAGE FOR *YOU* [an image of Trump looking confidently towards the camera (audience's eye) and behind him are his aids, including Steve Bannon, to appeal to power, getting ready for a presidential debate or a presidential rally. The use of the colors red, white and blue that are the colors of the American flag are used to signify and appeal to nationalism]. Also, ads 2.13 and 2.14.


       Figure 15: ad 2.7
       
       Parallelly, the most used rhetorical appeal was the appeal to emotions (pathos). These appeals were fear, anxiety, and anger, respectively. For example, ad 2.5 "we will protect and save our beautiful 2nd amendment. [signed] Donald J. Trump," the agent in this ad is referring to a long history of debate that rises to the surface every time a mass shooting accident happens in the US. This debate involves one of the rigid rights of bearing arms. The Democrats, including Clinton are in favor of changing the 2nd amendment, while the Republicans fiercely object to it and consider it a matter of national pride. And therefore, the agent, Donald Trump is appealing to nationalistic emotions (pathos). Or in ad 2.6 "Hillary Clinton would create the most liberal Supreme Court in the history of the United States," the agent in this ad is addressing non-liberals. In other words, addressing conservatives, and thus, appealing to ideological (nationalistic) beliefs. Therefore, the agent is appealing to emotions (pathos). 
       The ads that only appealed to reasoning (logos) were the least used and were added in combination to other appeals such as in ad 2.1 "she has been out smarted and out played worse than any person in any government. [signed] Donald J. Trump" the agent, besides denouncing the opponent, he is also providing reasons not to vote for her, therefore, appealing to reason (logos) that she is not fit for the position. 
       Thematic analysis
       The thematic analysis of the ads of this group reveled the main overarching themes that corresponded to a large extent to the multimodal rhetorical analysis. The final themes that resulted from the analysis were risk America and save America.  These two main themes corresponded to the results of the multimodal rhetorical analysis and were linked to the rhetorical strategies of 1) shaping the readers' perception about how it would be harmful for the people and the country to vote for Clinton (risk America); on the other hand, 2) build perceptions about how beneficial it would be to vote for Trump (save America) through the extensive use of emotionalization.
       Risk America
       This main theme emerged mainly form negative (attack) ads. It focused on persuading the readers that Clinton, through her long years of service on different places, mainly Secretary of State, was a corrupt politician and is untrustworthy. In ad 2.8 "Clinton's Message to Coal County: "We're Going To Put A LOT Of Coal Miners and Coal Companies OUT OF BUSINESS." showing her as a careless politician that would risk American's jobs. Also, in ad 2.11 "Obama-Clinton Foreign Policy [:] Dangerous nuclear deal WITH NUBER ONE STATE SPONSOR OF TERRORISM. Paying Iran a SECRET $400 MILLION RANSOM. COMPROMISE THE SECURITY OF THE UNITED STATES.", and in ad 2.15 "[Putin whispering in Clinton's ear while both smiling (agreeing to the content of the conversation) and the image is colored in a reddish tone to appeal to an evil conversation] BIG FAN OF THE WAY TOU TRY TO RIG ELECTIONS [signed Putin] DEFEAT CROOKED HILLARY [with handcuffs replacing the double o in the word crooked]". 
       By showing Clinton as a corrupt and untrustworthy politician to the reader, Trump was not only denouncing her, but also setting the stage for the readers on the following theme.
       
       
       Save America
        This theme was mainly visible in the advocacy and the contrast ads available in this group and, was highly dependent on construction on the previous main theme (risk America). As mentioned in the rhetorical analysis, Trump aimed at constructing an image of him as a trustworthy leader to persuade the voters to vote for him. In ad 2.16 for example, "I AM ASKING FOR THE SUPPORT OF ALL AMERICANS WHO WANT MORE OPPORTUNITY, HIGHER WAGES, SAFER COMMUNITIES, COMPETENT LEADERSHIP, AND HONEST GOVERNMENT [signed] DONALD J. TRUMP" the agent is constructing his image as the leader that will save the American people by doing the things he promises to do in this ad. Similarly, in the contrast ad 2.24 "The Choice in November IS A CHOICE BETWEEN A CLINTON AGENDA THAT PUTS DONERS FIRST -OR- a New Agenda That Puts America First. [signed] DONALD J. TRUMP". In this ad, the main theme was to portray Clinton as a risky choice for the American people, while painting Trump as the man that will put American interest first. And finally, in the advocacy ad 2.22 "[an American soldier on duty in what seems to be Iraq with the U.S. Army pledge on top] I do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies". In this last ad, next to that the agent is appealing to nationalism and national pride (country's army), the agent is also showing to the reader that protecting the army and the American power is one of his top priorities, therefore, showing the reader one way that by choosing him is a way to save America.  
5.3 Group Three
       This group consisted of the TV ads produced by the Vote Leave Campaign and were aired on national television not too long before the referendum day. Due to the lack of information on how many times the ads were aired or viewed from a reliable source, the ads were chosen based on the number of interactions on YouTube. This was under the assumption that the ads that would most resonate with people on YouTube would be also the one that were aired on national TV. This group was formed to answer the sub-question: what were the rhetorical techniques used by the Vote Leave Campaign during the Brexit referendum in the UK in 2016 in their television advertisements?
       
       
       
       
       Rhetorical techniques
Rhetorical functions
	Similar to group-one, the rhetorical functions of the ads in this group centered around setting the reader's agenda about how harmful the EU was to the UK. This was done in the attempt to persuade the reader that the EU is a 'corrupt system' that is severely harming the UK on many levels. The final conclusion about this group is that the Vote Leave Campaign relied heavily on rhetorical techniques that provided focused information that stroke the same cords as in their dark ads. The main rhetorical technique was the emotionalization of the reader's experience (nationalism, anger and fear) to mobilize the public opinion in the UK against the EU, mainly by feeding people's anger by setting their agenda on controversial topics. What was different in this group, however, is that in their TV ads the campaign used politicians such as David Cameron's and others' own words against them and employed these words in insulting them (insult politics). By doing so, the Vote Leave Campaign was likely aiming at 1) establishing trust with the readers by showing themselves as caring for and on the same side with the voters, thus providing reason why the voters should trust the campaign and that the UK should leave the EU; and 2) shaping the reader's perception that the EU is a burden on the UK in the form of encouraging immigration, restricting the UK's sovereignty, draining its economy and diminishing its younger generations' future opportunities; 3) discrediting politicians that support the Remain Campaign, and therefore, charge people against them and 'vote leave'. 
	Type of advertisement
	Except for two advertisements, all ads in this group were negative (attack) ads on the EU and the politicians that supported the Remain Campaign. One other ad was a contrast ad comparing the NHS in the case the UK was a member of the EU vs. outside of the EU. 
	The ads in this group were weaponized not only to launch general attacks on the EU, but also were used to discredit and even ridicule politicians that supported the Remain Campaign. This difference was attributed to what TV ads provides in terms of containing more information and features than the dark ads. Moreover, the ads were remarkably to contain first-order principles and had no sign of what their plan after would be leaving the EU. 
	The sample suggests that these negative (attack) ads were aiming at raising readers' doubts in the, back then, current political establishment in the UK represented by these politicians supporting Remain, urging those readers to Vote Leave. By doing so, the campaign was likely aiming at mobilizing the readers against the remain politicians, and therefore, make readers lose faith in the EU that they signify. This was mainly done by emotionalizing the reader's experience and by setting their agenda around the aforementioned topics (issues agenda).
        In the attempt of emotionalizing the readers' experiences, the campaign was likely doing so by employing advertising techniques that would raise the reader's fear and anxiety towards politicians such as David Cameron. In ad 3.2 "[narrator:] David Cameron cannot be trusted on Turkey, [David Cameron:] If your vote in this referendum is being influenced by considerations about Turkish membership of the EU, don't think about it. It's not remotely on the cards, it's not an issue in this referendum and it shouldn't be." The next scene in the ad displays members of the Turkish Parliament engaged in a physical fight to shape the reader's perceptions about Turkish politicians, that are supposedly elites that care more than normal people about their public image, thus, implying that normal Turkish people may be worse to live with. "[Narrator:] David Cameron now claims Turkey won't join the EU but that's not what he said before. [David Cameron]: This is something I feel vary strongly about, very passionately about. Together, I want us to pave the road from Ankara to Brussels." Finally, the narrator reads the content of the dark ad 1.8 that claims that the UK is paying £2 billion for "Macedonia, Serbia, Albania, Montenegro and Turkey to join the EU" and concludes that "you can't trust David Cameron on Turkey. If you want to save the NHS, Vote Leave". 
	Rhetorical appeals
       The most used rhetorical appeal in group-three was the appeal strong emotions (pathos) that often appeared as an appeal to reasoning (logos) at first sight. For example, in ad 3.1 that was a review of what politicians said about the EU and at the same time displaying outside proof of the opposite such as in ad 1 "[there is no question for any erosion of essential national sovereignty. Edward Heath, Prime Minister 1970- 1974. [narrator] for over 40 years we've been told lots of things about the EU, but were they true? [...]". The agent was appealing to reason with the interpreter to convince them that what they were being told about the relationship between the UK and the EU is not true. Thus, providing reasons to assess this relationship differently (logos). However, the construction of the ad was done in a way that charges the readers negatively from the politicians that support the UK membership in the EU, especially with strong emotions such as anger. Also, in ad 3.4 titled "Our money. Our priorities." This ad was also attacking the EU through the yet-to-become member states countries "[narrator] every week we send £ 350 million to Brussels. Money that's wasted. That's enough to build a new hospital every week. It will get worse. Imagine what will happen to public services when Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Turkey join the EU". In this ad, the agent is giving hypothetical situations where the UK's money is spent on people from other countries and charging the readers with anger against the EU that is driven from the act of wasting the UK's financial resources. 
       Finally, the appeal to credibility (ethos). This appeal was also highly interwoven with the other appeals, however, due to the repetition of the same information that projected knowledge authority in the form of exhibiting financial losses to the UK, this appeal was the least effective in terms of use. 
5.4 Group-four
       This group was formed from the TV ads that were used by Donald Trump in his campaign (2016) to answer the sub-question: what were the persuasive techniques of the Trump campaign national TV commercials during the US presidential elections 2016?
       Rhetorical techniques
       Rhetorical functions
       The rhetorical functions used in the ads in this group suggested the campaign's focus on an issues-agenda similar to the Facebook ads in group-one. Agenda-setting and voter-learning were highly interwoven due to the extensive use of attacks that were launched on Clinton during the campaign. By focusing on those rhetorical techniques, the campaign was likely aiming at 1) portraying Clinton as a failed, corrupt and risky politician, thus, a dangerous choice to vote for, and simultaneously, 2) portray Trump as the leader that will "flip Washington up-side-down" to "Make America Great Again". 
       The advertisements also focused on feeding the reader's negativity bias and appealed to certain strong emotions. The feeding of the reader's negativity bias was done in a similar way as in the Facebook ads, however, was in sophistication. For example, more topics were added to the TV ads such as those that are related to the economy. In ad 4.5, that was an advocacy ad titled "what does electing Donald Trump mean for you?", the agent focused on topics that appeal to the working class, the middle class in particular, and provided more information about actual money figures that helped structure the reader's expectations about the benefits that would follow the election of Trump. In this ad answering the question mentioned in the title, "Families making $60,000 a year, you get a 20% tax reduction. Working moms, you get paid maternity leave and up to $5,000 childcare tax reduction. Business owners, your taxes get cut from 35 to 15% so you can expand and create more jobs." 
        The feeding of the negativity bias was linked to the immense use of first-order principles in the advertisements and during the absence of reliable information about second-order principles. 
       Trump used the ad nauseam and lying and the main rhetorical strategies. The ad nauseam strategy was repeatedly used across the ads. Statements such as "It's more of the same but worse" , "she failed us as Secretary of State, don't let her fail us again" and "Hillary failed" to refer to Clinton, and "change that will make America great again" to refer to Trump were unified and in many times repeated not only in several ads, but repeated several times within the same ad. 
       Types of ads
       Most of the ads found in this group were contrast and negative (attack) ads. Only two ads were advocacy ads. The analysis revealed a single form that all contrast ads followed in their construction. The contrast ads contained of two main parts. The first part was used to launch personal attacks on Clinton and in one case on her family. This part was mainly 'dark' and started with dark images, imagery, and narration. For example, ad 4.3 "In Hillary's America, the middle class gets crushed, spending goes up, taxes go up, hundreds of thousands of jobs disappear. It's more of the same but worse." In this ad, the agent stroke chords that concern the American economy and the life of the middle class. This example of setting the reader's agenda about the economy and their will being was visible across most of the contrast and negative ads. 
       The attacks launched by the Trump 2016 campaign on Clinton in both the contrast and negative (attack) ads were on three levels. The first level was the attack on Clinton's poor performance in the Department of State. This was done through mentioning information about topics such as the Iran nuclear program, the Russian reset that led to the seizing of the Crimean Peninsula in Ukraine, the formation of terrorist groups such as ISIS (ad 4.10). The second level was to show Clinton as physically unfit to take office and perform the presidential tasks. This was done through a series of images of Clinton coughing, passing out, and being held and put in her car by her security details that implied her lack of fitness (ad 4.6) that mentions "[...] Hillary Clinton doesn't have the fortitude not the stamina to lead the world [...]". Although the images were not part of the analysis for group Three and Four, important highlights were mentioned when needed. Finally, the third level was to attack Clinton's financial integrity (ad 4.7) that described Clinton as "filthy rich". 
       The sample suggests that the main aim form the negative (attack) and the parts used in the contrast ads that attacked Hillary Clinton was that these ads were crafted for the purpose of raising fear, anger, and anxiety towards the situation where Clinton would be elected president.  The use of dark and grey imagery complimented with suspenseful music were a common strategy in these ads.  
       The advocacy and the contrast ads used to shed positive light on Trump provided mainly first-order principles. Remarkedly, the campaign used the advocacy ads to answer some of the accusations that Trump was xenophobic, racist, and misogynistic. It was also used to shape the reader's perceptions about the candidate. For example, Trump used footage of African-Americans to resemble the American family, or when he referred to the 'American dream' such as in ads (4.2 and 4.3). The campaign showed promises of Trump's support for women (usually appealed to Caucasian women with the absence of black or any other races), especially, the working women. In ad 4.5, the ad was narrated by Ivanka Trump, Trump's daughter and an entrepreneur. In the ad "[...] Donald Trump understands the needs of a modern workforce. My father will change outdated labor-laws so that they support women, and American families [...]" (own emphasis). The use of "my father" was seen as an attempt to appeal to women who see themselves like Ivanka Trump or have an admiration for her. Moreover, the use of a soft tone with uplifting music was to give the ad a positive vibe and gain the reader's trust.    
       Rhetorical appeals
       The main rhetorical appeal salient in this group was the appeal to emotions (pathos) such as fear, anger and anxiety. By focusing on these appeals, the campaign was likely aiming at shaping, with strong emotions, the reader's perceptions about Clinton and their issues-agenda. The appeal to emotions, however, was highly intertwined with the appeals to credibility (ethos), and reasoning (logos). 
       For the appeal to credibility (ethos), it usually complemented the appeal to emotions, especially in the contrast ads. As mentioned earlier, the contrast ads started by focusing negatively on Clinton, which the appeal to emotions (pathos) was the most salient. Next, in the part that focuses positively on Trump, the appeals were mainly to build his credibility (ethos) as a trustworthy contender. By combining both credibility (ethos) and positive emotions (pathos), the ads, indirectly, appealed to reasoning (logos) because of how the reader, in case they accept the information of the ad would think of Trump as 'the right choice'. 

       
6 Discussion
       This research investigated the persuasion techniques that were present in advertisements of the Vote Leave Campaign in the UK before the event of Brexit, and the advertisements of the Trump 2016 campaign before the U.S. presidential elections that contained disinformation, commonly known as 'fake news'. The existing studies on disinformation, especially in its persuasion techniques remains limited. This research relied on existing literature and research on political communication, disinformation, and the populist rhetorical techniques.
       
6.1 Main conclusions
       For the advertisements in the two campaigns, the results suggest that both campaigns adopted similar persuasion strategies. The only difference was in the implementation which was attributed to the different logics that rule the two different events (referendum vs. elections), and to the political-cultural differences that shape the political sphere in both countries. The two campaigns focused, proportionately, on the same issues-agenda - immigration, economy and trade, sovereignty and international relations (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). The only difference is that the Trump campaign also focused on more issues that are related to the political-cultural conflict around the 2nd Amendment and the right to bear arms, which is not of importance in the British context (Norris and Inglehart, 2019). Also, this focus varied in the display on the ads according to each campaign's own objectives. Thus, marking the importance of the different contexts in the two countries, and how this affects the choice of the ad content.
       The use of disinformation in both campaigns, if Alaphilippe et al. (2019) is true about amplifying political messages, seemed to serve both campaigns in terms of not only persuasion, but also had other important functions. The rhetorical functions in both campaigns included the main techniques used by populists in their political communication. Voter-leaning was used as a tool to shape readers' perceptions about how corrupt the EU is. Similarly, the Trump Campaign used the same tactic to persuade the U.S. readers that Hillary Clinton is corrupt and unfit for presidential tasks. Agenda-setting was also a common technique in the ads in both campaigns. This technique, in both campaigns was mostly found in combination with voter-learning and/or strong emotions 
        Propaganda techniques were also visible in the analyzed ads. Strong emotional appeals to emotions such as fear, anger and anxiety were used to persuade readers in both countries by both campaigns to build a base of supporters to from what was referred to earlier as tribes to reach political polarization that plays a role in not only building the social barriers between people, but also play a role in building loyalty . Also, strong emotional appeals (pathos) were employed to further scotomize those that lean more towards anti-European and anti-immigration sentiments in the UK, likewise, was used in the U.S. for the purpose of building social barriers, by focusing on ideological and controversial issues to divide readers.  
       The negative (attack) ads were highly similar in both groups in the way they were crafted, but also due to the differences in the two campaign types, the Trump attacks were more insulting and personal than the ones used in the Vote Leave ads including the ads crafted by the BeLeave campaign.
       Both campaigns relied heavily on first-order principles (Norris and Inglehart, 2019) and did not provide any useful information to the reader about what could be done in order to fix these issues. 
       The thematic analysis revealed corresponding selective themes for Facebook ads/posts. Each campaign had two selective themes, one shapes the opponent negatively, the other shapes the future without the opponent positively. Group-one ads suggest that the Vote Leave Campaign promoted to the reader that the EU possesses a national threat to the UK. Similarly, the Trump Campaign ads suggested that the campaign promoted that it would be a risk for America in the case where Clinton is elected president. Moreover, Vote Leave ads suggested the selective theme UK's future that includes both positive and negative scenarios about the future of the UK, in or outside the EU. The Trump campaign ads suggested the selective theme save America where the agent was urging the readers to save their beloved country by extensively appealing to nationalism.
       Therefore, both campaigns were using the highly similar persuasion techniques, however, this similarity was also contextual. 
6.2 Socio-theoretical implications and study limitations
       In general, the ads of both campaigns were of high sophistication due to several factors. First, a number of ads (dark ads) were designed by psychologists to appeal to specific readers' segments more than others which was something new at the time. Second, due to the cultural conflicts in the two countries where the two campaigns existed, the ads creation contained references to ideological issues that require the awareness of these conflicts and the different stance-points that exist on the issues. Finally, the ads containing disinformation, adds a layer of sophistication in terms of distracting the reader's ideas about the content of the ad. 
       While this study was an exploratory attempt to clarify persuasion techniques in ads that contained disinformation, this study had its limitations. Due to that studying persuasion techniques in disinformation ads/campaigns is relatively a new discipline, the absence of research on this topic may have had, an unnoticeable, negative effect on this study. Moreover, the absence of studies on the effectiveness of specific rhetorical strategies have restricted my understanding of their intentions as strategies, and therefore, may have played a role in wrongly concluding the aims of the ads in terms of persuasion purposes. Also, the short texts on the Facebook ads has played a role in shortening the thematic analysis of these ads. It would have been more beneficial to analyze the TV advertisements for that purpose, but as aforementioned, this was not possible due to the size of this study.
        As for future research on the topic, the combination of deception and ad nauseam as main rhetorical strategies added to the complexity and, perhaps, the effectiveness of these ads in the persuasion process. Due to the nature of this study, it was not possible to measure its effects in terms on persuading readers. Therefore, further studies on these two rhetorical strategies may indeed enrich scholarly understanding of the effective persuasion strategies. Also, further research on the persuasion techniques in disinformation ads/campaigns, in several contexts, is useful to understand its strengths and weaknesses.
       One of the main results in this study is that it confirmed the intensive use of first-order principles in the ads to address readers. While it should be self-evident to the reader that the agent in the ad is just criticizing their opponent and not providing any solutions, it would be beneficial to further investigate if adding a layer of deception through disinformation would play a role in persuading the reader more easily than if ads did not contain any false news/information. Finally, while there are studies that researched insult politics, the role these insults play in persuading readers remains under studied and would be beneficial to be added to the scholarly work. 
       For the societal implications of the study, this study possesses historical and societal value to those concerned with democracy transformations in Western societies, and the role media may play in that transformation. The reader's ability to spot the appeals and techniques that orators or agents employ in their political communication, may indeed help the reader better decide their aims. Additionally, by realizing the intentions behind these types of ads, the reader will be more critical about the news/ information they receive form these types of ads or campaigns, making them better able to spot disinformation.
7 References:

Alaphilippe, A., Gizikis, A., Hanot, C., & Bontcheva, K. (2019). Automated Tackling of Disinformation: Major Challenges Ahead. European Parliament.
Babbie, E. R. (2015). The basics of social research. Nelson Education.
Belam, M., & Gabbatt, A. (2020). Proud Boys: Who are the far-right group that backs Donald Trump?. The Guardian. Retrieved from: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/sep/30/proud-boys-who-are-far-right-group-that-backs-donald-trump
Belt, T. L. (2017). Negative advertising. Routledge Handbook of Political Advertising. New York: Routledge.
Block, E., & Negrine, R. (2017). The populist communication style: Toward a critical framework. International journal of communication, 11, 20.
Boeije, H. (2009). Analysis in qualitative research. Sage publications.
Borah, P. (2016). Political Facebook use: Campaign strategies used in 2008 and 2012 presidential elections. Journal of Information Technology & Politics, 13(4), 326-338.
Brader, T. (2005). Striking a responsive chord: How political ads motivate and persuade voters by appealing to emotions. American Journal of Political Science, 49(2), 388-405.
Brennen, B. (2017). Qualitative Research Methods for Media Studies: Second Edition. New York, London: Routledge. 
Cadwalladr, C. (2017, May 7). Vote Leave Donations: The Dark Ads, the Mystery "Letter"-and Brexit's Online Guru'. The Guardian. Retrieved from: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/may/07/the-great-british-brexit-robbery-hijacked-democracy
Cadwalladr, C., & Glendinning, L. (2018, September 8). Exposing Cambridge Analytica:'It's been exhausting, exhilarating, and slightly terrifying'. The Guardian. Retrieved from:  https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2018/sep/29/cambridge-analytica-cadwalladr-observer-facebook-zuckerberg-wylie
Carsey, T. M., & Layman, G. C. (2006). Changing sides or changing minds? Party identification and policy preferences in the American electorate. American Journal of Political Science, 50(2), 464-477.
Costello, D. P. (1972). From counterculture to anticulture. The Review of Politics, 34(4), 187-193.
De Vreese, H, C. (2017). Comparative political communication research. In the Oxford handbook of political communication. Kenski, K. & Jamison, K. H. (Eds) Oxford University Press. 
Dimock, M., Doherty, C., Kiley, J., & Oates, R. (2014). How Increasing Ideological Uniformity and Partisan Antipathy Affect Politics, Compromise and Everyday Life. Pew Research Center, June.
Entman, R. M. (1993). Framing: Toward Clarification of a Fractured Paradigm, Journal of Communication, 43 (4), Pages 51-58, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.1993.tb01304.x
Fallis, T. W. (2017). Political Advertising. The Oxford Handbook of Political Communication, Oxford University Press.
Fohr, S. D. (1979). The deductive-inductive distinction. Informal Logic, 2(2).
 Fox news (2016, October 13). Trump: our campaign is 'existential threat' to establishment. [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=Trump%3A+our+campaign+is+'existential+threat'+to+establishment.
Frankel, L. L., & Hillygus, D. S. (2014). Niche communication in political campaigns. In The Oxford Handbook of Political Communication (pp. 179-194). Oxford University Press.
Goel, V., Gold, B., Kapur, S., & Houle, S. (1997). The seats of reason? An imaging study of deductive and inductive reasoning. NeuroReport, 8(5), 1305-1310.
Hall, S., Evans, J., & Nixon, S. (2013). Representation: Edited by Stuart Hall, Jessie Evans and Sean Nixon. London: Sage Publications.
Hobolt, S. B. (2016). The Brexit vote: a divided nation, a divided continent. Journal of European Public Policy, 23(9), 1259-1277.
House of commons (2018) Interim Report. Retrieved from: https://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-committees/culture-media-and-sport/Fake_news_evidence/Vote-Leave-50-Million-Ads.pdf
Jacobs, L. R. (2014). Going Institutional: The Making of Political Communications. Handbook of Political Communication Theories.
Jarvis, S. E. (2017). Political messages and partisanship. The Oxford Handbook of Political Communication, 133-164. Oxford University Press.
Jenkins, P. (2017). A history of the United States. Macmillan International Higher Education.
Johnson, B. (2017). The UK & Great Britain - What's The Difference? Retrieved from:  https://www.historic-uk.com/HistoryUK/HistoryofBritain/The-UK-Great-Britain-Whats-the-Difference/
Jordan, K. N., Sterling, J., Pennebaker, J. W., & Boyd, R. L. (2019). Examining long-term trends in politics and culture through language of political leaders and cultural institutions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(9), 3476-3481.
Ku Klux Klan (2020). Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved from: https://www.britannica.com/topic/Ku-Klux-Klan
Lahti, Y. (2018). " Make America Great Again": a rhetorical analysis of campaign and presidential speeches by Donald Trump in 2016-2017. JYX. Retrieved from: http://urn.fi/URN:NBN:fi:jyu-201804232339
Learn about Lookalike Audiences | Facebook Business Help Centre. (2020). Retrieved 6 April 2020, from https://www.facebook.com/business/help/164749007013531?id=401668390442328
LeDuc, L. (2002). Referendums and elections: how do campaigns differ?. Routledge ECPR Studies in European Political Science, 25, 145-162.
Leidig, E. C. (2019). Immigrant, nationalist and proud: A Twitter analysis of Indian diaspora supporters for Brexit and Trump. Media and Communication, 7(1), 77-89.
Levitsky, S., & Ziblatt, D. (2018). How democracies die. Broadway Books.
Lieberman, R., Mettler, S., Pepinsky, T. B., Roberts, K. M., & Valelly, R. (2017). Trumpism and American democracy: history, comparison, and the predicament of liberal democracy in the United States. Comparison, and the Predicament of Liberal Democracy in the United States (August 29, 2017).
Lihtou, J. (2016). What Does 'Drain the Swamp' Mean? Donald Trump Started A New Hashtag. Retrieved 7 July 2020, from https://www.bustle.com/articles/191669-what-does-drain-the-swamp-mean-donald-trump-started-a-new-hashtag
Lilleker, D. G. (2006). Key concepts in political communication. Sage.
Livingstone, S. (2003). On the challenges of cross-national comparative media research. European journal of communication, 18(4), 477-500.
Luce, E. (2020). Even if Trump loses, Trumpism will live on. Financial Times. Retrieved from: https://www.ft.com/content/b4351768-be15-4866-be49-0806cf026c49
Morillas, P. (2017). Setting the Brexit agenda: Populism and UKIP in the United Kingdom. Barcelona Center For International Affairs.
Mukherjee, B. (1996). Beyond Multiculturism: Surviving the Nineties. Journal of Modern Literature, 20(1), 29-34.
Norris, P., & Inglehart, R. (2019). Cultural backlash: Trump, Brexit, and authoritarian populism. Cambridge University Press.
Oliphant, B. (2017). Bipartisan support for some gun proposals, stark partisan divisions on many others. Pew Research Center.
Owen, D. (2017). New media and political campaigns. In The Oxford handbook of political communication. Oxford University Press.
Platt, L., & Nandi, A. (2020). Ethnic diversity in the UK: new opportunities and changing constraints.
Rose, J., (2017): Brexit, Trump, and Post-Truth Politics, Public Integrity, DOI: 10.1080/10999922.2017.1285540 
Savoy, J. (2018). Trump's and Clinton's style and rhetoric during the 2016 presidential election. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics, 25(2), 168-189.
Schmidt, V. A. (2017). Britain-out and Trump-in: a discursive institutionalist analysis of the British referendum on the EU and the US presidential election. Review of International Political Economy, 24(2), 248-269.
Schultz, D. A. (Ed.). (2004). Lights, camera, campaign!: Media, politics, and political advertising (Vol. 11). Peter Lang.
Scott, M. (2018). Cambridge Analytica helped 'cheat'Brexit vote and US election, claims whistleblower. Politico.
Scott, R. L. (1967). On viewing rhetoric as epistemic. Communication Studies, 18(1), 9-17.
Siddique, H. (2016). Is the EU Referendum Legally Binding?. The Guardian.
Silverman, D. (2006). Credible qualitative research. Interpreting qualitative data, 271-314.
Smith, D., Singh, M., Beckett, L., & Wong, J. (2020). Donald Trump refuses to condemn white supremacists at presidential debate. Retrieved 3 October 2020, from https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2020/sep/29/trump-proud-boys-debate-president-refuses-condemn-white-supremacists
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. M. (1997). Grounded theory in practice. Sage.
Takens, J. H., van Hoof, A. M. J., Kleinnijenhuis, J., & van Atteveldt, W. H. (2011). Do new parties bring personalization, a narrow issue agenda and populist rhetoric? Evidence from Dutch election campaign coverage from 1998 to 2006. In Bending Opinion: essays on persuasion in the public domain (pp. 327-348). Leiden University Press.
Tesler, M., & Zaller, J. (2017). The power of political communication. In The Oxford handbook of political communication. Oxford University Press. 
The Guardian (2018, June 27). The Brexit whistleblower: 'Not cheating is the core of what it means to be British'. [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fcp_ISQmGfc
"The History of the Right to Bear Arms." Gun Control: Restricting Rights or Protecting People?. . Retrieved October 16, 2020 from Encyclopedia.com: https://www.encyclopedia.com/reference/energy-government-and-defense-magazines/history-right-bear-arms
Tucker, J. A., Guess, A., Barberá, P., Vaccari, C., Siegel, A., Sanovich, S., ... & Nyhan, B. (2018). Social media, political polarization, and political disinformation: A review of the scientific literature. Political polarization, and political disinformation: a review of the scientific literature (March 19, 2018).
Understanding Trump and Trumpism. The Heritage Foundation. Retrieved from: https://www.heritage.org/UnderstandingTrumpism
Van Belle, H., Gillaerts, P., Van Gorp, B., Van De Mieroop, D., & Rutten, K. (2013). Verbal and visual rhetoric in a media world(Vol. 2). Leiden University Press.
Virdee, S., & McGeever, B. (2018). Racism, crisis, brexit. Ethnic and racial studies, 41(10), 1802-1819.
Walker, A. (2016). Nigel Farage says Vote Leave campaign leaders are 'cretins'. Politico. Retrieved from: https://www.politico.eu/article/nigel-farage-ukip-leader-vote-leave-brexit-referendum-eu-boris-johnson/
Wiener, M. J. (2013). The idea of "colonial legacy" and the historiography of empire. Journal of the Historical Society, 13(1), 1-32.
Wilson, G. K. (2017). Brexit, Trump and the special relationship. The British Journal of Politics and International Relations, 19(3), 543-557.
Yunis, H. (Ed.). (2018). The Art of Rhetoric. Oxford University Press.
Zachry, M. (2009). Rhetorical analysis. The handbook of business discourse, 68-91.
Zhou, X., & Zafarani, R. (2018). Fake News: A Survey of Research. Detection Methods, and Opportunities. DOI: 10.1145/3395046
















"There is no more room on my bookshelf"
BookTube viewing in relation to the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers




Student name:			Britt Alsemgeest
Student number:			413479

Supervisor and first reader:	Dr. João Ferreira Goncalves
Second reader: 			Prof. Dr. Jeroen Jansz		

Date:					21/06/19
Word count:				22.656

Master's thesis
Master Media Studies (Media & Creative Industries)
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication
Erasmus University Rotterdam




Abstract

With the rise of Web 2.0 and online electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM), it became clear that people who are being exposed to large quantities of these online person-to-person eWOM messages have a higher purchase intention and buying behaviour, thus they are more likely to purchase consumer products after viewing such messages. The aim of this study is to investigate BookTube, which is a subset of the YouTube community and which consists of eWOM videos in which BookTubers talk about books and reading. BookTube is still a rather unexplored part of social scientific research, hence why this study aims to explore the relationship between watching BookTube videos on YouTube and the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers. In addition, the book buying behaviour and reading habits of both BookTube viewers and non-BookTube viewers are also compared and explored in more detail by means of an online survey (N = 1264). Results show that there is a positive relationship between watching BookTube videos and the book buying behaviour and reading habits of the viewers and that viewers thus buy and read more books when watching more BookTube videos. Furthermore, viewers buy significantly more books if their motivation to watch BookTube videos is to gain information about new books on the market. On the other hand, viewers buy significantly fewer books if their motivation to watch BookTube videos is to be entertained or to acquire a feeling of community. Lastly, results show that people who watch BookTube videos buy and read significantly more books compared to people who do not watch BookTube videos. It can thus be said that there is a clear relationship between watching BookTube videos and the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers, as well as between the book buying behaviour and reading habits of BookTube viewers and non-BookTube viewers. BookTube viewers thus feel the need to own and read an extensive number of books if they watch a lot of BookTube videos which means that watching BookTube videos plays a significant role in the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers. 










Keywords: BookTube, eWOM, buying behaviour, reading habits, influencer marketing

Table of contents

1. Introduction........................................................................................................5
   1.1 Research questions.............................................................................................7
2. Theoretical Framework.........................................................................................8
   2.1 Book buying behaviour in recent years.....................................................................8
   2.2 Motivations for watching YouTube videos.................................................................9
   2.3 Web 2.0 and user-generated content.........................................................................9
   2.4 EWOM.........................................................................................................11
	2.4.1 YouTube as eWOM................................................................................12
	2.4.2 Source credibility...................................................................................13
	2.4.3 Consumer socialisation.............................................................................13
	2.4.4 EWOM scepticism..................................................................................15
   2.5 Sponsored videos on YouTube..............................................................................16
	2.5.1 Influencer marketing................................................................................16
   2.6 Advertising effectiveness.....................................................................................19
   2.7 Research on BookTube......................................................................................20
   2.8 Concluding.....................................................................................................21
	2.8.1 Conceptual framework..............................................................................22
3. Methodology......................................................................................................23
   3.1 Research design...............................................................................................23
   3.2 Sampling.......................................................................................................23
	3.2.1 Population............................................................................................23
	3.2.2 Sampling method...................................................................................24
	3.2.3 Sample...............................................................................................25
   3.3 Operationalisation and measurements.....................................................................26
	3.3.1 Motivations for watching BookTube videos....................................................26
	3.3.2 Viewing habits......................................................................................28
      3.3.3 Source credibility...................................................................................28
	3.3.4 Purchase intention...................................................................................30
	3.3.5 Sponsored videos...................................................................................31
	3.3.6 Book buying behaviour and reading habits.....................................................34
   3.4 Data collection and analysis.................................................................................35
	3.4.1 Data analysis.........................................................................................35
   3.5 Validity and reliability.......................................................................................36

4. Results.............................................................................................................37
   4.1 Book buying behaviour of BookTube viewers...........................................................37
	4.1.1 Motivations for watching BookTube in relation to book purchasing........................37
	4.1.2 BookTube viewing in relation to book buying behaviour.....................................38
	4.1.3 Source credibility...................................................................................39
   4.2 Book format....................................................................................................40
   4.3 Sponsored BookTube videos................................................................................41
	4.3.1 Persuasion knowledge..............................................................................41
	4.3.2 Attitude towards sponsored BookTube videos..................................................42
   4.4 Book genres....................................................................................................43
   4.5 Exploratory analyses..........................................................................................45
	4.5.1 BookTube viewers vs. non-BookTube viewers.................................................45
	4.5.2 Likeliness of purchasing books....................................................................45
	4.5.3 Popular books on BookTube.......................................................................46
	4.5.4 Reading habits of BookTube viewers............................................................46
5. Conclusion and Discussion.....................................................................................49
   5.1 Main findings..................................................................................................49
   5.2 Theoretical implications.....................................................................................49
	5.2.1 Book buying behaviour of BookTube viewers..................................................49
	5.2.2 Sponsored BookTube videos......................................................................50
	5.2.3 Book genres.........................................................................................51
   5.3 Exploratory analyses..........................................................................................52
	5.3.1 BookTube viewers vs. non-BookTube viewers.................................................52
	5.3.2 Likeliness of purchasing books....................................................................52
	5.3.3 Popular books on BookTube......................................................................52
	5.3.4 Reading habits of BookTube viewers............................................................53
   5.4 Conclusion.....................................................................................................53
   5.5 Societal implications..........................................................................................53
   5.6 Limitations.....................................................................................................54
   5.7 Suggestions for future research.............................................................................55
References...........................................................................................................57
Appendix - Survey.................................................................................................68


1. Introduction 

      Social media, defined by Kaplan and Haenlein (2010) as "a group of Internet-based applications that build on the ideological and technological foundations of Web 2.0, and that allow the creation and exchange of user-generated content" (p. 61), have changed the way that consumers are exposed to new products and services. Whether people go on Instagram or Twitter or watch a video on YouTube, it is inevitable that they will be exposed to marketing campaigns and consumer items. The relationship between the buying behaviour or consumption behaviour, and the use of social media, has already been widely studied by many scholars (Lee, 2018; Pelixo, 2018; Thoumrungroje, 2014). However, this research will go even deeper into this phenomenon by exploring a small subset of the YouTube community. 
      Hennig-Thurau, Gwinner, Walsh, and Gremler (2004) define eWOM as "any positive or negative statement made by potential, actual, or former customers about a product or company, which is made available to a multitude of people and institutions via the internet (p.39). Social media is an ideal tool for electronic word-of-mouth (eWOM), because consumers can easily create and share brand-related information to their network of family, friends, and followers (Chu & Kim, 2011). Especially during these digital times, it is important to know the relationship between social media and eWOM in order to get a better understanding of the impact of social media and eWOM on the buying behaviour of the users. While much research has already been done on eWOM (Black & Kelley, 2009; Cheong, Lee, & Thadani, 2009; Kim, Mattila, & Baloglu, 2011; Vermeulen & Seegers, 2009). this research will further explore eWOM in the context of YouTube.
      YouTube is an online video platform that was founded in 2005 and it allows its users to post, comment, view, and link to videos on the site (Dehghani, Niaki, Ramezani, & Sali, 2016). On YouTube, an average of 400 hours of video are uploaded every minute (Smith, 2019). A large part of those videos feature products that people can buy, such as beauty products, games, or books. Such commercial videos can be in the form of, for example, video reviews that often impact the consumers' purchase decisions (Korfiatis, Barriocanal-Garcia, & Sanchez, 2012). Since the rise of eWOM, people do not have to reach out to friends, family, or marketer-generated sources to acquire information. They can simply go online to interact with each other and share product-related information (King, Racherla, & Bush, 2014). In this research, the relationship between watching BookTube videos on YouTube and the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers will be explored.
      BookTube is a community of content creators on YouTube of people who make book related videos in which they discuss everything that is related to books and reading (Perkins, 2017). Similar to game and beauty videos, BookTube is a subset of the YouTube community. Originally, the videos that these BookTubers posted were mostly book reviews, however, many new video topics have been introduced recently; for example, book hauls, in which the BookTuber shows the books that he or she has recently bought; reading wrap ups in which the BookTuber talks about the books that he or she has recently read; or a bookshelf tour in which the BookTuber gives a virtual tour of his or her bookshelf. The most popular genre that is discussed on BookTube is Young Adult (YA) (Hughes, 2017), which is a genre that focuses on children between 12 and 18 years old. However, YA books are also very popular amongst older BookTubers. 
      Studying the relationship between watching BookTube videos and the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers is a logical choice, because these videos can be considered as eWOM, since nearly every video is associated with specific books or book related items that the BookTuber shares his or her positive or negative statements about (Hennig-Thurau et al., 2004). A popular BookTuber, Emma Giordano from the BookTube channel Emmmabooks, argues that being part of BookTube community makes you want to purchase more books, since people all want the book collections the size of their favourite BookTuber (Ehret, Boegel, & Manuel-Nekouei, 2018). The subscribers and followers of these big influencers often see them as examples and they therefore want to have what they have. Companies have realised this as well and have now started to use these BookTubers as tools in their advertising campaigns: the companies pay the influencer to talk about or show a specific product in their content in the hope that it influences the viewers to purchase the product (Wojdunski & Golan, 2016). 
      In addition, Emma Giordano from Emmmabooks discusses the participatory pressures of BookTube, meaning that people tied to the community, who thus create videos themselves or only watch videos, can feel pressured to buy a lot of books in order to really become part of the community (Ehret et al, 2018). This is something that I personally relate to as well, since I have a BookTube channel called Basically Britt, which means that I am very invested in the community. With this research, I want to find out whether this statement can be backed up by research and whether people who thus watch BookTube videos buy more books, compared to people who do not watch BookTube videos. 
      It is important that more research is done on BookTube, because the community mainly consists of videos with eWOM messages and since eWOM is currently a very important topic in social scientific research, BookTube should not be left out. We need to find out how BookTube viewing relates to the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers by exploring this topic in more detail. Studying the relationship between watching these videos and the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers is a relevant topic to study, because it will partly fill a research gap that has appeared in research about BookTube, since most research on BookTube focuses on how publishing houses and sponsors work together with BookTubers (Kroupová, 2018) instead of focusing on the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers. In addition, studying eWOM for books should not be neglected, since the revenue of the book publishing industry in the USA has not declined between 2008 and 2017 (Statista, 2018), thus, the book publishing industry is still a relevant topic to study. Finally, since reading for pleasure is proven to be beneficial for writing ability (OECD, 2003), text comprehension and grammar (Cox & Guthrie, 2001), and breadth of vocabulary (Angelos & McGriff, 2002), it is of social interest to study BookTube, since BookTube is a platform that encourages reading for pleasure, especially amongst a younger audience. 
      Primarily, this research focuses on the relationship between watching BookTube videos and the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers, however, in order to gain a deeper understanding of the book buying behaviour and reading habits of readers, the people who watch BookTube videos will also be compared to people who do not watch these videos and who are thus solely exposed to new books via other means. 
      
1.1 Research questions
      Considering the framework above, BookTube remains a vastly unstudied part of social scientific research and this research will partly fill these research gaps. Since the little research that has been done on BookTube only focused on a variety of topics, such as the motivations for watching BookTube videos (Camargo & Chiareto, 2016), sponsored BookTube videos (Nelson, 2006), and favourite book genres of the viewers (Hughes, 2017) the objectives of this research therefore led to the following research question and sub questions:
      
To what extent does watching BookTube videos relate to the book buying behaviour and the reading habits of its viewers?
- What is the difference in the relationship of the book buying behaviour and the reading habits between people who do watch BookTube videos and people who do not?
- To what extent are viewers likely to purchase a book that a BookTuber talks positively about in one of their videos?

      By means of an online survey, the aim of this research is to answer these research questions and to get a better understanding of the book buying behaviour and reading habits of people who do and people who do not watch BookTube videos. First of all, the important concepts that are associated with this research will be thoroughly explored in order to understand the context in full. After that, an outline of the methodological design of this research will be provided, followed by the detailed results of the statistical analyses performed in SPSS. Finally, the results of the survey will be discussed in detail followed by the concluding chapter that will acknowledge any limitations of this research and will provide the reader with suggestions for future research. 
      




2. Theoretical framework 

In this chapter, an insight will be given into what research has previously been done on the relationship between online media and the buying behaviour of the users. First of all, various basic concepts that are of importance to this research will be discussed, including consumer's (book) buying behaviour, Web 2.0, user-generated content (UGC), and eWOM. Afterwards, attention will be given to sponsored videos on YouTube, advertising effectiveness, and previous research that has been done on BookTube. This chapter also introduces the various hypotheses that will be tested in this research. 

2.1 Book buying behaviour in recent years
	In the last decades, there have been significant changes in the publishing industry. Due to new digital technologies, new forms of books are now coexisting with the traditional books and these electronic books (ebooks) resulted in big changes in consumer behaviour, reading, communicating, and writing cultures (Banou, 2017). In addition, due to advances in technology and the rise of social media, the publishing industry has been forced to alter their marketing strategies and to face these new challenges and opportunities. These developments have brought forth very favourable changes, since social media is now a place where new reading communities are built and where books are often promoted (Banou, 2017). BookTube is a prime example of such an online community of readers. 
      As mentioned, the Internet and digital technology have rapidly developed in recent years and as a result, the traditional way of reading has changed. Ever since the release of the Amazon Kindle and Apple's iBooks, the global ebook revenue has increased from $1.42 billion in 2009 to a staggering $15.87 billion in 2016 (Statista, 2017). However, due to the increasing popularity of the ebooks, some researchers argue that the physical book industry should be concerned about the decreasing demand for physical books (Li, Li, & Gu, 2019). However, as mentioned by Banou (2017), the sales of physical books have actually increased in 2016, thus the popularity of physical books is thriving again. The popularity of ebooks, however, does strongly depend on the demographics of the readers. Gray and Howard (2017) argue that teens strongly prefer to read physical books over ebooks, because they are disinterested, and sometimes unaware, of the advantages that ebooks are able to provide them. One participant in a study by Li et al. (2019) also argued that even though the YA ebook collection is growing, teens still want to read physical books.
	Studies have shown that the apparent growth in the popularity of YA ebooks may have been driven by adult readers instead of by teens. Springen (2012) argues that a survey has shown that two-thirds of YA ebook purchases are made by adults between the ages of 18 and 44. Of course, it was difficult to determine whether these books were purchased as a gift or whether they were reading these books themselves. The researcher argues that adults might feel embarrassed for reading YA books, hence why they purchase them as ebooks instead of as physical books (Springen, 2012). 
2.2 Motivations for watching YouTube videos
	YouTube is a popular platform on the Internet that is able to provide its viewers with informational and entertaining video content (Klobas, McGill, Moghavvemi, & Paramanathan, 2018). Since it has been reported that a large part of the population who watch online YouTube videos watch these videos several times a week or more than once a day, it is clear that YouTube is becoming part of the everyday lives of many viewers (Lagger, Lux, & Margues, 2012). The motivation to use traditional, as well as online social media platforms, is directed by the need for the users' gratification (Ruggiero, 2000) which is part of the uses and gratifications theory that aims to understand why people seek out specific media to satisfy their needs. The uses and gratifications theory can thus be helpful in understanding why people decide to seek out specific YouTube videos to watch. In the case of YouTube, there are three needs for gratification that stand out: the need for information gratification that is associated with informational content (Haridakis & Hanson, 2009), which can be linked to the cognitive need for gratification (West & Turner, 2010); the need for hedonic gratification through entertainment content (Haridakis & Hanson, 2009), which can be linked to the hedonic need for gratification (West & Turner, 2010); and finally, social gratification through social connections that are related to the content (Haridakis & Hanson, 2009), which can be linked to the social integrative need for gratification (West & Turner, 2010). West and Turner (2010) also report a fourth important need, namely tension release, which means that users watch online videos to escape and divert real life. An example of the need for information gratification is that consumers consciously look for reviews online to decide whether or not they should purchase a specific product. The Benchmarking Company (2016), for example, stated that 88% of cosmetics consumers spend time online to find out about certain beauty products before deciding on actually purchasing them. Since people often search for information online before deciding on purchasing a product, it can thus be expected that people whose motivation to watch BookTube videos is primarily to gratify the need for information seeking are more likely to purchase a book after watching a BookTube video.

H1: Viewer's need for information is positively related to book purchasing. 

2.3 Web 2.0 and user-generated content
      After the dot-com bubble burst in 2001, the web encountered a turning point and a lot of new developments were introduced. Tim O'Reilly, in collaboration with MediaLive International, began identifying this new important development of the web as Web 2.0 (O'Reilly, 2007). He argued that this turning point for the web brought forth many positive consequences. The change from Web 1.0 to Web 2.0 has affected not only the way people make decisions, communicate, learn, and socialise, but also their buying behaviour was impacted, since consumers now have unlimited choice and access to information and knowledge they were previously unknown to (Constantinides & Fountain, 2008). Another factor, and positive consequence, that differentiates Web 2.0 from Web 1.0 is that the latter embraces and accepts the power of collective intelligence (O'Reilly, 2007). Collective intelligence, first introduced by Pierre Lévy in 1994, defines the term as pooling intelligence and memory, sharing knowledge, and enhancing people's image of one another (Lévy,1997). Thus, Web 2.0 can be seen as 
a platform on which the users are the ones who collectively consume, create, and spread original content and therefore facilitate the flow of knowledge and ideas.    
      Due to Web 2.0, businesses have been presented with new challenges but also with new opportunities for staying and getting in touch with possible new markets, determining the opinions and needs of their customers and communicating with them in a personalised way (Constantinides & Fountain, 2008). In addition, Web 2.0 has given people the opportunity to create their own content by establishing a so-called blog. These blogs have already been around since 1999 (Williams & Jacobs, 2004), however, with the rise of Web 2.0, the new web allowed its users to not only provide their own data and services, but also to remix the data from others (O'Reilly, 2007). Blogging, as part of Web 2.0, can therefore be seen as one of the earliest examples of user-generated content.
	User-generated content (UGC) refers to content in the media that is created by the public rather than by professionals who get paid for it (Daugherty, Eastin, & Bright, 2008). Examples of UGC are videos, pictures, tweets, and blog posts that are created by users promoting a specific brand rather than the brand promoting itself (Gallegos, 2016), and these posts can be either branded or unbranded (Poch & Martin, 2015). Thus, the videos that BookTubers create that contain (sponsored) content about specific books or other consumer items are considered a form of UGC. Since the rise of Web 2.0 and UGC, the ordinary consumer has therefore been given the potential to influence a mass audience and to communicate with them. Some notable examples of websites that allow for the creation and consumption of UGC include Facebook, Wikipedia, YouTube, Twitter, and Blogger (Daugherty et al., 2008). 
      The reasons and motivations for audiences to seek and be exposed to specific UGC or other media content vary greatly. As argued by Eastin and Daugherthy (2005), audiences seek UGC according to their internal motivations, and these motivations represent sources that are designed to meet consumer needs. In addition, these sources result in attitude formation which ultimately influences behaviour (O'Keefe, 2002). Another form of exposure to UGC is by incidental exposure, which means that people are exposed to specific UGC when they did not necessarily look for it. Thus, it is exposure that is brief and unintentional (Ferraro, Bettman, & Chartrand, 2008). This incidental exposure can actually result in a change of consumer attitudes, since it can impact the image that a person has on a specific brand that they have been exposed to (Ferraro et al., 2008).
      In addition to consuming UGC, the motivations for creating UGC vary greatly as well (Daugherty et al., 2008). Some of the main attitudes that form the motivations for creating UGC are the ego-defensive function, which recognises that people seek to minimise any self-doubts that they might have. In addition, people create UGC, because it drives them to spend time with others online and it creates a sense of community (Daugherty et al., 2008). These motivations are examples of intrinsic and extrinsic motivations for creating UGC (Poch & Martin, 2015). When the creation of UGC is intrinsically motivated, it receives no apparent reward and is solely created because it is enjoyable (Ryan & Deci, 2000). Extrinsic motivation, on the other hand, refers to doing something because it is rewarded either with positive feedback or economic incentives (Poch & Martin, 2015). 

2.4 EWOM
      Traditional word of mouth (WOM) can be defined as "informal, person-to-person communication between a perceived non-commercial communicator and a receiver regarding a brand, a product, an organisation, or a service" (Harrison-Walker, 2001, p. 63). Thus, WOM is a form of spoken communication which is focused on transmitting information to others. However, since the rise of Web 2.0, WOM has developed into electronic word of mouth (eWOM). As mentioned in the introduction, electronic word-of-mouth are positive or negative statements about products or organisations that are created by online users and which are made available to others online through the Internet (Hennig-Thurau et al., 2004). Instead of these messages being created by professional brands and organisations, they are created by non-experts or reference groups and they are disseminated in online platforms. In the realm of consumer behaviour research, eWOM is seen as an influential factor when it comes to brand recognition (Lee, Rodgers, & Kima. 2009), product preference (Vermeulen & Seegers, 2009), and purchase behaviours (Dellarocas, Zhang, & Awad, 2007). Previous studies on consumer behaviour have also concluded that reference groups are able to influence the purchasing behaviour of consumers (Bearden & Etzel, 1982; Engel, Blackwell, & Miniard, 1993). Recommendations from such groups play an important role in the decisions that consumers make regarding the purchase of new products or services, especially when these products or services are new and/or expensive (Hsu, Chuan-Chuan Lin, & Chiang, 2013). 
      Advertisements are often seen as a form of formal communication, whereas recommendations from bloggers and other online content creators constitute a channel of informal communication. This informal and non-commercial communication is often considered a credible source of information for consumers (Mangold & Faulds, 2009) and research has shown that such recommendations lead to higher purchase intentions amongst the online social network of peers (Wang, Yu, & Wei, 2012).
      In addition to eWOM being an informal and credible source of information, another aspect related to eWOM that influences the purchase behaviours of people is the number of followers of the person online. Consumers who are exposed to positive eWOM messages from people with a large number of followers end up showing a significantly higher buying intention (Jin & Phua, 2014). Previous studies suggest that people want to conform to the expectations of others, thus, they adjust their behaviour by observing and mimicking the behaviour of others (Zhu & He, 2002). In addition, consumers can be highly influenced by the weight of popular opinion (Rindfleisch & Inman, 1998). In the case of BookTube it can therefore be expected that viewers look up to and are influenced by dedicated BookTubers who have a substantial number of followers and views, since they can be considered as a credible source of information. 

2.4.1 YouTube as eWOM
      Even though not much research has been done on BookTube, an extensive amount of research has been done on YouTube as eWOM and the buying behaviour of YouTube viewers and social media users. Due to the development of social media, consumers have been increasingly exposed to large amounts of eWOM information and they have intentionally, as well as unintentionally, been affected by that content in regards to their purchase decisions (Erkan & Evans, 2016). Pelixo (2018) came to the conclusion that expectations that are created by watching online eWOM videos on YouTube relate to the purchase decision after viewing such videos. In addition, in his research he argued that out of 346 people, 194 admit to occasionally purchasing a product after watching a video review on YouTube. Furthermore, TABS Analytics (2017) as mentioned in Lee (2018), reported that YouTube is seen as the number one important social media platform for helping consumers make decisions about what cosmetics to buy. It is plausible to assume that this can also be applied to books, since readers would want to know what books they might enjoy. A reason for this is that consumers perceive UGC to be more useful and credible than producer-generated content, thus, content created by the brands themselves, because consumers do not think that UGC results in any commercial gains for the user (Purnawirawan, De Pelsmacker, & Dens, 2012). 
      Research has shown that consumers trust eWOM more if it comes from a close friend or relative (Bansal & Voyer, 2000; Sweeney, Soutar, & Mazzarol, 2008), however, in online communities, consumers do sometimes trust eWOM, even though the messages come from people with whom they do not have strong ties. These findings show that trust can also be based on the concept of rapport. Rapport can be seen as the level of similarity between the readers and senders of eWOM (Fan & Miao, 2012). Rapport is a bond that a person feels towards someone with whom they share tastes, preferences, and lifestyles (Smith, Menon, & Sivakumar, 2005). Even though people might not have strong personal tries with someone, this feeling of rapport can still occur. Finally, Varma Citrin, Sprott, Silverman, and Stem (2000) studied whether higher levels of internet usage resulted in a higher level of electronic commerce and they found a significant positive relationship between the two. It can therefore be expected that people who watch more BookTube videos tend to buy significantly more books that people who watch fewer to no videos. However, the opposite causal direction can also occur; namely that people who buy more books are the ones that tend to be more drawn to watching BookTube videos. But this research will only look at a possible relationship between watching BookTube videos and buying books, not at a causal relationship which explores the influence of one on the other.  
      
H2: BookTube viewing is positively related to book buying.
2.4.2 Source credibility
	As mentioned earlier, recommendations from bloggers and other online content creators are considered a credible source of information (Mangold & Faulds, 2009) and it is proven that source credibility is a major factor in establishing the communication effectiveness of messages (Hovland & Weiss, 1951). After the rise of advertising research, source credibility also proved useful in establishing the effectiveness of advertisements. The source credibility is of vital importance when advertisers want to achieve the highest possible financial benefits. They try to achieve this by using certain types of people in their advertisements that are similar to the target audience or that are endorsed by the audiences (Wiener & Mowen, 1986) to ensure that the audiences find the people in the advertisements more credible. BookTube is a great example of this, since publishers sometimes use BookTubers to market their newest book releases and since BookTube viewers are greatly interested in books and reading, the target audience will find the BookTubers a credible source of information. 

H3: The level of perceived credibility of the BookTuber is positively related to book purchasing.
      
      Source credibility has two sub-dimensions, namely expertness (or competence), which describes the extent to which consumer generated advertising (CGA) are perceived to be "a source of valid assertions" (Hovland, Janis, & Kelley, 1953, p.21) and trustworthiness, which relates to the "consumer's confidence in the source for providing information in an objective and honest manner" (Ohanian, 1991, p. 47). The rich body of literature that can be found in the domain of source credibility research has demonstrated that sources that can be perceived as highly credible produce more attitude change in comparison to sources with low credibility (Petty & Wegener, 1998). In this research, both the expertness and the trustworthiness of BookTube videos will be measured in order to see whether these concepts relate to the book buying behaviour of its viewers. Many researchers argue that, in the eyes of the consumers, consumer generated advertising (CGA), thus messages and posts that contain sponsored products, actually appear to be more trustworthy and credible than advertisements created by companies (Chatterjee, 2011; Jonas, 2010; Lawrence, Fournier, & Brunel, 2013).
      The concept of source credibility can be applied in the context of sponsored content, as well as non-sponsored content. For the sake of this research, source credibility will be used to measure effectiveness of non-sponsored eWOM messages. 

2.4.3 Consumer socialisation
	Socialisation can be considered as a bundle of processes by which people from different cultural backgrounds and communities achieve the need for a peaceful existence as a group and it encompasses the norms and rules of a society that people learn throughout their lives (Maccoby, 2007). Marketing literature has extended this concept of socialisation as 'consumer socialisation'. The consumer socialisation theory, firstly introduced by Ward (1974), predicts that communication that occurs amongst consumers has an impact on the affective, cognitive, and behavioural attitudes. Thus, it describes how consumers are involved in learning processes that shape their ideas and attitudes about being a consumer in society. The consumer socialisation theory represents two theoretical perspectives for predicting and understanding consumer-to-consumer communication: the cognitive development model and the social learning theory (Moschis & Churchill, 1978). The cognitive development model, first introduced by Jean Piaget (1964), focuses on viewing learning as a psychological process of adjustment to one's environment. The cognitive development model also suggests that socialisation is a process which allows knowledge to be gradually acquired and shaped by people the more mature they get (Moschis & Churchill, 1978). The social learning theory, on the other hand, emphasises the socialisation agents, or peers, who transmit attitudes, norms, motivations, and behaviours to learners. Thus, it is about the learning that happens in a social context by means of imitation, observation, and reinforcement (Mishra, Mahaswarappa, Maity, & Samu, 2018). 
	Parents are considered to be the first socialisation agents, however, during the adolescent period of someone's life, peers become more important. Adolescents find the approval of peers more important than the approval from parents when it comes to, for example, brands and fashion choices (Lachance, Beaudoin, & Robitaille, 2003). This explains why people connect to peers online, since peers seek approval from each other. In addition, people consider the information they gather from peers to be trustworthy since it comes from people with whom they can relate. The fact that people often communicate with people who are similar is related to the concept of homophily.  
	Homophily was first introduced by McCroskey, Richmond and Daly (1975) and it refers to the similarity of the source and the receiver of a message. It is argued that contact between people who are similar occurs more often than amongst dissimilar people (McPherson, Smith-Loving, & Cook, 2001). McCroskey et al. (1975) based their measures of perceived homophily on the principle of interpersonal communication: the more the source and the receiver are similar, the more influence the interpersonal communication has. In the case of BookTube it can be expected that both the BookTuber and the viewer are similar in that they share a great interest for books and reading. It is also apparent in my YouTube channel that mostly peers watch my videos, since over 52% of the viewers are between 18 and 24 years old, which is similar to my age. This is equivalent to what Camargo and Chiareto (2016) discovered; namely that in Brazil the largest population who watches BookTube videos is also between 18 and 24 years old. 
      These previous findings are a sign of interpersonal peer communication, which can be defined as "encouragement or approval of certain behaviours and intentions through either spoken or unspoken messages that peers send to each other" (Lueg & Finney, 2007, p. 27). It has been proven that peer communication has a significant impact on attitude towards advertising (Bush, Smith, & Martin, 1999) and that it is positively related to materialistic values and the motivations for consumption (Churchill & Moschis, 1979). Interpersonal peer communication can be divided into spoken and non-spoken messages. Spoken messages refer to 'reinforcement' and non-spoken messages refer to 'modelling or observational behaviour" (Lueg & Finney, 2007). Spoken interpersonal communication is also known as WOM, and in the case of YouTube, as eWOM. This interpersonal peer communication that occurs online can be a factor of peer influence, since people are influenced by the eWOM, as well as the non-spoken messages that they are exposed to online. It has been proven that WOM has a significant influence on the attitude and behaviour of consumers (Brown & Reingen, 1987) and WOM is deemed more effective than mass media advertising. Since eWOM takes place online, in an environment where people may be somewhat unknown to each other, it allows them to be more truthful when sharing their opinions. This is related to the concept of the online disinhibition effect, which was introduced by Suler (2004). Suler (2004) argues that people feel less restrained and are able to express themselves more openly in the online world, hence why they are more likely to speak the truth. 	
      Since previous findings suggest that peers are influenced by each other in terms of consumer behaviour and materialistic value, it can be expected that there is a relationship between people who watch a lot of BookTube videos and the number of books they buy, since eWOM and homophily are of importance in this situation. This is in line with both H2 and H3. In addition, people believe that those who are similar to them have similar needs and therefore indulge in greater eWOM behaviour (Prendergast, Ko, & Yuen, 2011). 

2.4.4 EWOM scepticism
      In some situations, consumers may not be fully convinced by the eWOM messages that they are exposed to. This scepticism towards eWOM can be explained as a certain disbelief towards the claims that are made in advertisements. One of the possible reasons for this scepticism is due to a socialisation process as well as earlier purchasing experiences (Weitzl, 2017). A more specific example of a reason for eWOM scepticism is the many cases of online astroturfing (Forrest & Cao, 2010; Malbon, 2013). Astroturfing is when fake grassroots organisations are sponsored by large corporations to support claims in their favour or to challenge any arguments against them (Cho, Martens, Kim, & Rodrigue, 2011). Due to these cases of astroturfing, internet users have realised that there is a possibility of being deceived by eWOM (Zhang, Ko, & Carpenter, 2016). However, it is possible for consumers to differ with regards to eWOM scepticism; some consumers may have a different level of scepticism towards a specific eWOM message and they may thus perceive that same eWOM message differently, and then react to it differently as well (Friestad & Wright, 1994). These different levels of eWOM scepticism that people experience can be explained by the individual's personality type as well as the product type that they are exposed to (Ford, Smith, & Swasy, 1990). Since BookTube videos are a prime example of eWOM, it is possible for viewers to experience a certain degree of scepticism as well. This may especially be the case when BookTube videos contain a sponsored product that is thus paid for by a brand or publisher. For my research, I want to explore whether BookTube viewers feel this form of eWOM scepticism when watching BookTube videos in which the BookTuber is sponsored and thus paid to talk about a specific book or brand. 

2.5 Sponsored videos on YouTube
      Ever since the rise of Web 2.0 and UGC, businesses have taken advantage of the new developments which now allow them to personally communicate with the customers as well as determine the opinions and needs of the customers. A large part of eWOM is sponsored UGC, also known as user generated advertising (UGA); thus, brands pay content creators to create a specific kind of post, photo, or video containing or promoting one of their products. Using online content creators, or even celebrities, to endorse a product is becoming a popular strategy amongst advertisers because of the significant influence on consumers' brand loyalty and awareness (Miller & Laczniak, 2011). In 2006, over 2 billion dollars was spent on celebrity advertisements in the United States (White, Goddard, & Wilbur, 2009). Companies invest in online content creators and celebrities in order to improve their brand trustworthiness and recognition and to create positive attitudes towards the brand (McCracken, 1989). This UGA allows companies to advertise their products to a global, yet niche audience. It is therefore not uncommon to come across videos on BookTube that feature, for example, a specific book that was sponsored by a publisher. BookTubers allow publishers to advertise their books in ways that was previously not common to the publishing industry, namely by using social media. 
      Using YouTube as a marketing tool is an example of native marketing, since this marketing strategy focuses on seamlessly incorporating an advertisement in the video content, which is different from traditional commercials where it is obvious that the consumer is exposed to an advertisement (Wu, 2016). Native marketing, or YouTube endorsement marketing, can be categorised into three forms: (1) a direct sponsorship where the YouTuber partners with the brand and is paid by that brand to create a video featuring a specific product or service, (2) affiliate links where the YouTuber receives a small commission when the audience purchases a product or service through a link, or using a coupon, that is provided by the YouTuber, and (3) free product sampling where brands send the YouTubers a product for free in the hope that it will be featured in one of the videos (Wu, 2016). For the sake of this research, the only category that will be focused on is the first one; a direct sponsorship. 

2.5.1 Influencer marketing
      Using BookTubers to advertise books is an example of influencer marketing. Influencers are people who have a substantial number of followers on social media platforms such as YouTube and Instagram (Perloff, 2014). In the BookTube community, some of the biggest BookTubers are Christine Riccio from the BookTube channel PolandbananasBOOKS, with over 400.000 subscribers, and Sasha Alsberg from the BookTube channel Abookutopia, with over 370.000 subscribers. The subscribers and followers of these big influencers often see them as examples, since these YouTubers also started out as 'just' average people creating content online. Much attention is therefore given to their personality, which many viewers strive to achieve as well (Westenberg, 2016). This is exactly in line with what I previously mentioned in the introduction about Emma Giordano from the BookTube channel Emmmabooks, stating that being part of the BookTube community makes the viewer want to purchase more books because people want to have a book collection the size of their favourite BookTuber or influencer (Ehret et al., 2018). Buying and owning a lot of books is also something that is encouraged in the BookTube community, since BookTubers often post videos in which they show their latest book purchases, which means that purchasing a lot of books is becoming a normalised practice. Purchasing books after watching BookTube videos is also made incredibly easy for the viewers, since BookTubers often post (affiliate) links in the description box of their videos in which the viewers are instantly directed to a website where they can purchase the books that were mentioned in the video. Most often, these links are affiliate links to the popular website The Book Depository, which stocks over 20 million books and ships books worldwide with free shipping (The Book Depository, 2019). Nakamura (2013) also argued that "the tight integration of readerly community with commerce is an absolute given, an indispensable feature of reading in the digital age" (p. 239), thus the online reading community is tightly ingrained in the economy. With these findings I can hypothesise the following:
      
H4: There is a relationship between watching BookTube videos and reading physical books instead of ebooks or audiobooks.
      
      Thus, companies have started to use these BookTubers as advertising tools: the companies pay the influencer to talk about or show a specific product in their content. The amount of impact these BookTubers have on the sales of books can be illustrated with the following example about two YA books that were both published in 2012; Enchanted by Alethea Kontis and The Selection by Kiera Cass. Both books have similar covers, premises of the story, and they were both reviewed by the trusted book review website Kirkus. On Kirkus, Enchanted received an extensive amount of positive reviews and it even was on the "Best of 2012" Young Adult list, whereas The Selection received much less favourable reviews. However, The Selection managed to sell a staggering amount of over 360,000 copies until 2017, whereas Enchanted only sold just over seven thousand (Hein, 2017). Of course, a reason for this difference could be a possible difference in the marketing budgets for both books, but one clear difference in the marketing strategy was that The Selection was focused much more on engaging with the online YA communities. The marketing campaign for The Selection even included an official trailer on YouTube, which now has over one million views. In addition, searching for "The Selection book review" on YouTube results in thousands of videos including a video by popular BookTuber Christine from PolandbananasBOOKS, which has over 241 thousand views. This proves that BookTubers have an incredibly broad reach online, and also suggests that they have a big influence on which books become popular (Hein, 2017). 
      Given the strong rules from the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) in the United States regarding sponsored content nowadays, content creators have to disclose that the video or post that they are sharing features a sponsored product. In addition, in the UK YouTubers also have to signify a sponsored video or post by using the tags #spon (sponsored) or #ad (advertisement) in the title and description of the video (Sweney, 2014). However, sometimes it is still unclear whether a video or post features such a sponsored product and Wu (2016) argues that, after close examination, YouTube marketing is extremely effective and trending but it urgently needs more transparency. Sometimes consumers are not aware of the fact they are exposed to sponsored content, and they can thus be persuaded into purchasing products that they may otherwise have avoided (Boerman, Willemsen, & Van Der Aa, 2017). Although content creators are paid to promote a certain product, consumers do seem to have more trust in the motives of the content creator, since they attach their name to a specific brand or product, thus, the content creator is motivated by a genuine liking for the brand or product, rather than for the financial benefits (Atkin & Block, 1983).
      However, the Persuasion Knowledge Model (Friestad & Wright, 1994) which is able to measure people's knowledge about the tactics and goals of persuasion agents and companies, as well as how people use this knowledge to cope with such attempts to persuasion, is useful when viewers are aware of the fact that they are exposed to a sponsored video or other sponsored content. This model has proven to be useful in various studies about, for example, word-of-mouth (Hamilton, Vohs, & McGill, 2014), brand placement (Matthes, Schemer, & Wirth, 2007), and numerous types of online marketing and advertising (Boerman et al., 2017; Tutaj & van Reijmersdal, 2012). It is believed that persuasion knowledge is a process that develops throughout life, thus the older someone gets the higher their persuasion knowledge becomes, but some researchers assume that adults are able to rightfully distinguish advertising from non-commercial content as well as understanding the tactics that the advertiser intends to use (Boerman, Reijmersdal, Rozendaal, & Dima, 2018). I can therefore hypothesise that older BookTube viewers have a higher persuasion knowledge than younger BookTube viewers and that the level of persuasion knowledge increases the older someone becomes.
      
H5: Older BookTube viewers have a higher persuasion knowledge than younger BookTube viewers. 

However, these assumptions about persuasion knowledge are challenged by sponsored content, which is seen as a covert marketing tactic. Since covert marketing deals more with advertising that is done in an entertaining and purposeful way in order to resemble the content and thus blur the lines between commercial and non-commercial content, it is more difficult to distinguish advertising (Boerman et al., 2018). However, in my research I will solely be asking about persuasion knowledge in a context where BookTube viewers are aware of the fact that they are watching a sponsored video, thus they know that they are being exposed to advertising. Boerman et al., (2018) have therefore developed a reliable scale to measure consumers' persuasion knowledge of sponsored content. In their newly created scales they measure various contexts of sponsored content, such as "the recognition of sponsored content" (p. 679), the "understanding of the selling and persuasive intent of sponsored content" (p. 679), and "the self-reflective awareness of the effectiveness of sponsored content" (p. 680). Some of these scales will be used in this research as well.

2.6 Advertising effectiveness 
      When publishers and brands decide to advertise online they aim for advertising effectiveness. Some aspects of advertising effectiveness are brand attitude, purchase intention and source credibility. The attitude towards advertising in general have a strong influence on the overall advertising effectiveness. Studies on the attitudes towards advertising have proven that a positive attitude towards advertising in general resulted in people recalling these advertisements more than those who had a negative attitude towards advertising (Donthu, Cherian, & Bhargava, 1993). In addition, the results of a study by James and Kover (1992) suggest that people who feel advertising is not in any form manipulative and people who feel that advertising is a good way to learn about new services or products are more involved in the advertisements and spend more time looking at them. 
      The efforts that are made by publishers and other book related companies in creating marketing campaigns, and possibly using BookTube influencers in the process, are aimed at persuading people to construct a positive attitude towards the brand and towards the product that they wish to advertise (Wojdunski & Golan, 2016). This brand attitude is referred to as "a relatively enduring, unidimensional summary evaluation of a brand that presumable energises behaviour" (Spears & Singh, 2004, p.55). Thus, brand attitudes are able to influence people's behaviour. By sponsoring BookTubers and promoting books on BookTube publishers want to create a positive attitude towards the brand and increase the purchase intentions of the viewers. 
      Another aspect of advertising effectiveness is purchase intention, defined by Spears and Singh (2004) as "an individual's conscious plan to make an effort to purchase a brand" (p.56). The intention to purchase products can be influenced by various aspects. Mehta (2000) concluded that the purchase intention of people who feel that advertising has an informational and truthful value is positively influenced by those factors. With these findings, I can hypothesis that BookTube viewers who have a positive attitude towards sponsored BookTube videos are more likely to purchase a book after watching such a video.
      
H6: The attitude towards sponsored BookTube videos in positively related to purchasing books.  
      
      For the sake of this research, purchase intention will be used to measure effectiveness of eWOM messages. Brand attitude will not be measured, since this research focuses not exclusively on one specific brand, but on the perception of sponsored and non-sponsored BookTube videos in general. 

2.7 Research on BookTube
      As mentioned earlier, watching BookTube videos in relation to the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers is still a rather unexplored part of social scientific research, however, some research has been done on various aspects of BookTube. Camargo and Chiareto (2016) performed a survey which intended to explore the motivations for watching BookTube channels as well as the effects it had on the reading habits of the viewers. It became clear that viewers find it of great importance that they can personally relate to the BookTuber and that they value the opinions of BookTubers that are similar to them. As a result, Camargo and Chiareto (2016) argue that BookTube viewers are more likely to buy a new book after watching BookTube videos if they personally relate to the BookTuber who addresses the book. This is related to the concept of rapport that was introduced by Fan and Miao (2012), which means that the viewers trust the BookTubers who are similar to them and with whom they can personally relate.  
	Since BookTube viewers can watch several hours of BookTube videos, these videos are also of great interest to publishers, since their goal is to promote and sell as many books as possible. Through BookTube, publishers are able to reach new audiences, create new readers and spread information about their books by allowing influential communicators or influencers to talk about the books (Nelson, 2006). Therefore, it is not uncommon to see BookTube videos that contain sponsored content, since these videos reach thousands of new possible customers. In addition, it is financially beneficial for the BookTuber, since they get paid to promote these books and products. This is exactly in line with what I want to explore further in this research; namely how BookTube viewers perceive sponsored content and whether it relates to their book buying behaviour in any way. 
	Hughes (2017) came to the conclusion that the most popular genre that is discussed on BookTube is young adult, or YA, and that over 80% of the books that are mentioned by big BookTubers are published by one of the Big Five (Penguin Random House, HarperCollins, Simon & Schuster, Hachette, and MacMillan). The reason for this is because these BookTubers tend to collaborate with publishers, thus, publishers send out their new books to all these BookTubers at the same time. In addition, after interviewing various BookTubers, Hughes (2017) argued that BookTubers have an influence on what books become popular as well as on the sales of particular books. For my research, I want to find out whether this is still relevant and whether there might be similarities in the type of book genres that BookTube viewers read as well as the books they have recently purchased because of BookTube. I can hypothesise that the young adult genre will be one of the most popular genres amongst BookTuber viewers.

H7: Young adult will be more popular amongst BookTube viewers compared to people who do not watch BookTube videos.

	Garcés Estrada, Avitia Rodríguez, and Ramírez Hernández (2018) did an exploratory research on BookTube viewers in Mexico and concluded that the majority of the BookTube viewers are female and that females are more likely to be influenced by BookTubers to read a specific book. In addition, they found that people who watch BookTube videos tend to be influenced by these videos, because they feel like they have a connection with the BookTuber, since they are interested in the same books. Again, this can be connected to the concept of rapport (Fan & Miao, 2012). For my research, I want to explore whether this connection also plays a role for international BookTube viewers, since the research by Garcés Estrada et al. (2018) only focused on Mexican people, whereas my research will focus more on international people who predominantly watch BookTube videos spoken in English. 
	It is clear that the majority of BookTubers are women (Albrecht, 2017) and this finding is a mirrored image of the offline book world, since women are considered more likely to be devoted readers (Ballard, 2018) as well as avid buyers of books (Abrams, 2015; Anderson, 2009). In addition, significantly more women than men work in the book industry (Clark & Phillips, 2014), hence why it is not surprising to see that the majority of BookTubers are female.  

2.8 Concluding
	In conclusion, the previously mentioned theories provide a framework that will help answer the research question of what the relationship is between watching BookTube videos and the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers. Since much research has previously been done on the relationship between using social media and the buying behaviour of its users it is expected that this study will result in a positive relationship between the variables. However, since this research focuses on a part of social media, namely BookTube, that has not been studied extensively before, it is the question whether the previous findings will also apply to BookTube.  
	This research will mainly focus on whether certain aspects of BookTube videos, such as the motivation for watching BookTube videos, advertising effectiveness and sponsored videos, source credibility, and eWOM scepticism, change the relationship between watching videos and the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers. In addition, different demographics will also be taken into account to explore whether this affects the relationship. Finally, people who do watch BookTube videos will be compared to people who do not watch these videos, in order to explore the differences in the book buying behaviour and reading habits between these two groups
	The conceptual framework below gives an overview of the concepts that will be studied and the hypotheses that will be tested. The following chapter of this research will explain the methodology that was used in this study.  
2.8.1 Conceptual framework
	The conceptual framework shown in Figure 1 presents the theoretical concepts and hypothesis in one overarching framework that maps out the required steps that must be taken to explore the BookTube phenomenon in more detail. The single lines represent the variables that will be tested for correlations. This research features no causal tests, hence why all variables will be tested for correlations instead of causal relationship.



Figure 1 - Conceptual framework for exploring the relationship between watching BookTube videos and the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers
















3. Methodology 

3.1 Research design
      This study aims to explore the relationship between watching BookTube videos on YouTube and the book buying behaviour and reading habits of its viewers. In addition, BookTube viewers as well as people who do not watch BookTube videos are also compared in terms of their book buying behaviour and reading habits to see whether there are differences in these relationships and whether BookTube thus plays a role in the book buying behaviour and reading habits of people. 
      In order to answer the research question, this research is conducted by means of an online survey using Qualtrics. The research tests whether different aspects related to watching BookTube videos result in a difference in the relationship to the book buying behaviour and reading habits of the viewers. Such aspects, or the independent variables, include the demographics of the viewers, as well as their perception of sponsored videos and their knowledge about persuasion techniques of brands, their scepticism towards eWOM, the source credibility of the BookTubers, and their motivations for watching BookTube videos. The book buying behaviour and reading habits are characterised by the number of books someone has purchased and read in the last two months, as well as the favourite genres, their preferred reading format, and the places that the respondents usually buy the books. 
	Since an online survey is used to gather the necessary data to explore this topic, this research uses a quantitative research method. Quantitative methods are able to explain phenomena by collecting data that is numerical and that is afterwards analysed using methods based in mathematics (Muijs, 2010). The advantages of an online survey are that it is a fast and efficient way to gather responses and data and it also allows for a wide geographic reach (Sue & Ritter, 2012), which means that people from around the world are able to participate in this research. This is exactly what was necessary for this research, since hardly any research that has previously been done on BookTube focused on a worldwide audience, whereas the participants in this research currently reside in 68 different countries. Therefore, conducting an online survey was necessary to use in order to fill this research gap and to explore the topic on an international level. 

3.2 Sampling

3.2.1 Population
	For this research, the population is people of any age who have an interest in reading and buying books. Since the initial aim of this research was to explore the relationship between people who watch BookTube videos and their book buying behaviour and reading habits, BookTube viewers were of particular interest. However, also people who enjoy reading and buying books but who do not watch BookTube videos were asked to participate in order to compare these two groups of people and to see whether there is a difference in the book buying behaviour and reading habits between people who do watch BookTube videos and people who do not. In addition, no exceptions were made regarding age, gender, sexuality or nationality, which means that everyone was able to participate in this research. 

3.2.2 Sampling method
	The respondents in this online survey were gathered through the use of various online media. First of all, YouTube was used to distribute the survey amongst people who watch BookTube videos. A message was posted on the BookTube channel Basically Britt that contained a link to the survey. In addition, Twitter and Instagram were also used to distribute the survey amongst people who predominantly watch BookTube videos. A tweet containing the link to the survey was posted on the Twitter account @BrittAlsemgeest and the tweet was shared over 150 times, which means that the tweet was exposed to over 8000 people. The reason that these social media accounts were used to gather responses was because these accounts were able to provide for a relevant sample of BookTube viewers, since many BookTube viewers follow these accounts. The social desirability bias was avoided by clearly stating that the survey was anonymous, thus participants were encouraged to answer as truthfully as possible.
      In order to also gather responses from people who do not watch BookTube videos, the survey was shared in online book clubs and book communities on Facebook, such as the Facebook Book Club, the Free Book Club, and The Nerdy Book Club, as well as on the website Goodreads, which is a website that allows its users to track their reading and create an online bookshelf of books that the users still want to read or books they have already read. Finally, everyone who was exposed to the link to the survey was encouraged to share that link on their own social media channels as well. 
	There were also some eligibility criteria for the participants. First of all, the inclusion criteria, which are certain characteristics that potential respondents should have in order to participate in the survey (Sue & Ritter, 2012). Since the channels on which the survey was shared all targeted avid readers, the characteristics were that the respondents should be (avid) readers and buyers of books. As mentioned earlier, no exceptions were made regarding age, gender, sexuality, or nationality. The excluding criteria, which are the characteristics that rule out potential respondents to participate in a survey (Sue & Ritter, 2012), were the language barrier, since the survey was created in English, as well as the fact that possible respondents had to have an account to one of the social media sites that were previously mentioned, since the survey was only distributed through social media. 
	The sampling method that was used to gather respondents is a form of nonprobability sampling. Even though it is advised to avoid the use of nonprobability sampling for most statistical tests (Sue & Ritter, 2012), for an online or mobile survey it is often impractical to use probability sampling. Another reason that impacted the decision to use nonprobability sampling was that nonprobability sampling is relatively cheaper than probability sampling and it can often be used more quickly (Etikan, Musa, & Alkassim, 2016). Homogeneous purposive sampling was used to gather the respondents, since homogeneous sampling focuses on people who share similar characteristics and traits (Etikan et al. 2016). In the case of this research, these similar traits were that the possible respondents all enjoy reading and buying books. An advantage of homogeneous purposive sampling is that it saves a lot of time and it is possible to easily target a very niche audience. However, a disadvantage is that is can be difficult to generalise the results to the entire population. 

3.2.3 Sample
	 In total, 1432 people participated in this survey, however, from this total number of participants, only 1264 completed the survey all the way to the end, resulting in a completion rate of 88.3%. All of the 1264 participants were eligible to participate in the survey, however, not all answers were suitable to analyse since some open answered questions were not filled in correctly. Of the total number of participants, 1210 people indicated to be female (95,7%), 44 people indicated to be male (3.5%), 7 people indicated that they identify with a different gender (0.6%), for example, non-binary or transgender, and 3 people preferred not so share their gender (0.2%). It is clear that there is a great gender imbalance in the sample. A possible reason for this is that reading books is currently more popular amongst females compared to males (Albrecht, 2017). In addition, of the 13,000 people who are subscribed to the BookTube channel Basically Britt, 96% are female as well, thus it is not surprising to see that the majority of the respondents indicated to be female. 
      Respondents were between the age of 11 and 77, with a mean age of 26.69 (SD = 10.14). As can be concluded from the sample, the majority of the participants were between 17 and 28 years old (68.6%), which is likely due the fact that the survey was distributed through social media channels that are popular amongst teens and young adults. For example, Instagram is most popular amongst teens between 13 and 17 followed by young adults between 18 and 29 (West, 2019), and the majority of the BookTube viewers of the BookTube channel Basically Britt, with over 13,000 followers, are in the age range of 18 to 24. Therefore, it was not surprising to see that the majority of the participants were under the age of 30. 
      The respondents were located in 68 different countries. Of the total number of respondents, 435 currently reside in The United States of America (34.4%), which was by far the largest number, followed by The United Kingdom, in which 197 people currently reside (15.6%), and The Netherlands, with 132 respondents (10.4%). Regarding the highest educational level that was attained by the respondents, the majority of the people attained a Bachelor's degree at either university or a university of applied science (38.5%). Another large group have attained a secondary or high school education (32.2%), followed by a Master's degree at either university or a university of applied science (11.4%) and secondary vocational education (11.3%). Finally, 40 respondents indicated to have attained a different educational level (3.2%), followed by a MBA or PhD degree (2.1%), and primary school (1.3%).
	Of the total number of participants, 1076 indicated that they have heard of the term 'BookTube' before (85.1%), however, 87 of these people indicated that even though they know about BookTube, they not watch BookTube videos. A total number of 989 respondents do watch BookTube videos (78.2%).  

3.3 Operationalisation and measurements

3.3.1 Motivations for watching BookTube videos
	The motivations for watching BookTube videos were measured using a scale based on the uses and gratifications model including five needs (West & Turner, 2010). On a seven-point Likert scale (Likert, 1932), the participants were asked to indicate their motivations on a scale from 'strongly disagree' to 'strongly agree'. Only four out of the five needs were used to measure the motivations, since one need - personal integrative - did not match the overall research objective of this study and was thus not relevant to include in this survey. Of the 30 items that were used in the research by Sjöblom and Hamari (2017), nine were used for this research, since these items managed to measure all of the four needs that were of importance to this research. In addition, some items did not match the research objectives, such as 'I like when other users take my comments into account' and 'members of the community have shared important events together'. For each need, various statements were presented that measured the motivations. The affective need was measured with the items 'I find BookTube videos enjoyable' and 'I find BookTube videos entertaining'. These items were firstly introduced by Venkatesh (2000) (Cronbach's α = .92). The cognitive need was measured with the items 'I want to be informed about new books I would not otherwise have found' and 'I want to find out which books I should read next'. These items were firstly introduced by van der Heijden (2004) (Cronbach's α = .93). The social integrative need was measured with the items 'watching BookTube videos makes me feel less lonely' and 'it is important for me to be part of the BookTube community'. These items were firstly introduced by Smock, Ellison, Lampe, and Wohn (2011) (Cronbach's α = .90) and Chavis, Lee, and Acosta (2008) (Cronbach's α = .89). Finally, the tension release need was measured using the items 'watching BookTube videos helps me to forget about school, work, or other things', 'watching BookTube videos is a habit', and 'watching BookTube videos helps me to relax'. These items were firstly introduced by Smock et al. (2011) (Cronbach's α = .92). 
      A factor analysis was performed on this nine-item seven-point Likert scale that measured the motivations for watching BookTube videos. All nine items were entered into the factor analysis using the Principle Component Extraction with Varimax rotation that was based on Eigenvalues higher than 1.00, KMO = 0.82, X² (N = 989, 36) = 3612.99, p = < .001. The resultant model explained 71.2% of the variance in the motivations for watching BookTube videos. The factor loadings of the individual items onto the three factors found are presented in Table 1. The following factors were found:
	Entertaining. The first factor included four items that were all related to the entertainment purposes of BookTube videos, thus the viewers find the videos enjoyable, entertaining, relaxing, and habitual (M = 5.77, SD = 0.93). A reliability analysis was conducted to examine whether the scale was reliable. This new factor proved to be reliable (Cronbach's α = .78). However, the reliability test indicated that the reliability could be improved to Cronbach's α = .80 by deleting the item 'watching BookTube videos is a habit', but since the reliability was already high, it was decided to not delete this item. 
	Community. The second factor that was found included three items that were linked to the feeling of being part of a community when watching BookTube videos. Thus, people watch BookTube videos because it makes them feel less lonely, because they find it important to be part of the BookTube community, and because it helps them to forget about school, work, or other things (M = 5.02, SD = 1.30). This new factor proved to be reliable as well (Cronbach's α = .76). This reliability was the optimal reliability that could have been obtained with this scale, thus, all three items were kept. 
	Informative. Finally, the third factor included two items that were both related to the informative values of watching BookTube videos, for example, because viewers find out which books they should read next as well as being informed about new books they otherwise would not have found (M = 6.12, SD = 0.95). This new factor also proved to be reliable (Cronbach's α = .72). Deleting an item would not have been possible, since the factor only included two items. 


















Table 1: Factor and reliability analysis for BookTube motivations (N=989). 
Items			            		      Entertaining       Community        Informative         
I find BookTube videos enjoyable		.856		

I find BookTube videos entertaining		.839			

Watching BookTube videos helps		.657		.464
me to relax	

Watching BookTube videos is a habit		.603		.436

Watching BookTube videos makes				.833
me feel less lonely					   		

It is important for me to be part of				.746
the BookTube community			

Watching BookTube videos helps me		.300		.734
to forget about school, work, or other
things 

I want to find out which books I							.840
should read next				   
 
I want to be informed about new books						.836
I would not otherwise have found				   
					
R²						45.10%		14.25%		11.82%	     
Cronbach's α 					.78		.76		.72	        
Note: factor loadings <.30 are suppressed. Factor loadings presented in bold indicate which items belong to which factor. 

3.3.2 Viewing habits	
      Besides the motivations to watch BookTube videos, the BookTube videos the respondents watched most often was measured on a five-point Likert scale ranging from never to very often including the items 'book haul', 'book unhaul', 'bookshelf tour', 'reading wrap up', TBR (to be read)', 'book review', 'book tag', and 'reading vlog'. The option to answer I don't know these videos was also added to ensure that all possible answers were included. The videos that were watched most often were 'reading vlogs', with a mean of 4.31 (SD = 1.09) and 'reading wrap ups', with a mean of 4.17 (SD = 1.02).

3.3.3 Source credibility
	Source credibility was measured using the items based on Ohanian's (1990) ideas about source credibility. As mentioned in the theoretical framework, source credibility has two sub-dimensions: trustworthiness and expertness. Source trustworthiness was measured by answering the following statements on a five-point Likert scale ranging from 'strongly disagree' to 'strongly agree'. The participants stated how much they agreed with the following statements: 'The BookTuber is...' (1) honest, (2) dependable, (3) reliable, (4) sincere, (5) trustworthy. The second variable that was measured was expertness. Again, by using five statements derived from Ohanian's (1990) research, the participants stated how much they agreed with the following statements: 'The BookTuber is...' (1) an expert, (2) experienced, (3) knowledgeable, (4) qualified, (5) skilled. Finally, the third variable that was measured was how much the BookTube viewer relates to their favourite BookTuber. This was measured by the following two statements: (1) I identify myself with the BookTuber, and (2) the BookTuber shares my interests. These final two statements were created by me. 
	A factor analysis using the Principle Component Extraction with Varimax rotation that was based on Eigenvalues higher than 1.00, KMO = 0.82, X² (N = 989, 66) = 5374.77, p = < .001 showed that three new factors were found. The resultant model explained 66.6% of the variance in opinions of the source credibility of the BookTubers. The factor loadings of the individual items onto the three factors found are presented in Table 2. The factor analysis showed that all five items for expertness were loaded into one component. This is the same as in Ohanian's (1990) scale. This new factor was named Expertness (M = 4.14, SD = 0.67) and proved to be highly reliable (Cronbach's α = .87). Deleting an item would not have resulted in a higher reliability, thus no items were deleted.
      The factor analysis also showed that all five items for trustworthiness were loaded into one component, which again is the same as in Ohanian's (1990) scale. This new factor was named Trustworthiness (M = 4.63, SD = 0.49) and proved to be highly reliable as well (Cronbach's α = .84). Deleting an item would not have resulted in a higher reliable, thus no items were deleted.
	Finally, the third factor that was found related to the level that the viewers can relate to the BookTubers, which included the items 'I identify myself with the BookTuber' and 'the BookTuber shared my interests'. This new factor was named Relatable (M = 4.02, SD = 0.72) and proved to be slightly reliable (Cronbach's α = .66). Deleting an item would not have been possible, since the factor only included two items. Thus, the reliability could not have been improved. 











Table 2: Factor and reliability analysis for Source Credibility (N=989). 
Items			            		      Expertness       Trustworthiness        Relatable         
The BookTuber is experienced			.818		

The BookTuber is qualified			.813			

The BookTuber is an expert			.778

The BookTuber is skilled			.758		

The BookTuber is knowledgeable		.755		.303			   		
The BookTuber is trustworthy					.791

The BookTuber is reliable					.787

The BookTuber is sincere					.782				   
 			
The BookTuber is honest					.732

The BookTuber is dependable					.697

The BookTuber shares my interests						.848

I identify myself with the BookTuber						.834		   
					

R²						42.83%		13.70%		10.12%	     
Cronbach's α 					.87		.84		.66	        
Note: factor loadings <.30 are suppressed. Factor loadings presented in bold indicate which items belong to which factor. 

All twelve items were also measured for reliability together and they proved to be highly reliable (Cronbach's α = .87), thus a variable with all twelve items was also created which thus encompassed all measures of source credibility (M = 4.32, SD = 0.48). This variable is useful if source credibility in general is to be used for tests. 

3.3.4 Purchase intention
	Purchase intention was measured on a seven-point semantic differential scale that was developed by Spears and Singh (2004). The scale ranged from 'extremely unlikely' to 'extremely likely' and concerned the question 'If a BookTuber talks positively about a book, how likely are you to buy it?' (M = 5.39, SD = 1.18). 



3.3.5 Sponsored videos
	The perceptions and opinions about sponsored videos on BookTube were measured on a seven-point Likert scale ranging from 'strongly disagree' to 'strongly agree'. This scale measured the persuasion knowledge, the eWOM scepticism and the opinions of BookTube viewers on the transparency of sponsored videos and it consisted of nine items in total.

Persuasion knowledge
	Persuasion knowledge was measured on a seven-point Likert scale ranging from 'strongly disagree' to 'strongly agree'. The statements that were used to measure persuasion knowledge were all derived from a study by Boerman et al. (2018) in which their main aim was to create a suitable scale for measuring persuasion intention. The researchers created nine components of persuasion knowledge, however, since the survey in this research also measured a variety of other things, including all nine would have resulted in the survey being too long. Thus, three out of the nine components that were most suitable for this research were used to measure persuasion knowledge.
	The first component that was used was regarding the "understanding of the selling and persuasive intent of the sponsored content" (Boerman et al., 2018, p.683) (Cronbach's α = .89). For this component, the participants were asked to indicate the degree to which they agree with the following two statements: 'publishers/brands sponsor videos to encourage people to buy the book/brand', and 'publishers/brands sponsor videos to make people think positively about the book/brand'. These are two of the original six statements and they were altered in order to fit the research purposes of this research. 
	The second component regarded the "understanding of persuasive tactics in sponsored content" (Boerman et al., 2018, p.683) (Cronbach's α = .76). For this component, the participants were asked to indicate the degree to which they agree with the statement 'publishers/brands try to influence me by placing the book/brand in a context that I like'. This was one of the original five statements and this statement was also altered in order to fit the research purposes of this research. 
	Finally, the last component that was used to measure persuasion knowledge was the component regarding the "self-reflective awareness of the effectiveness of sponsored content" (Boerman et al., 2018, p.683) (Cronbach's α = .89). The statement that was used to measure this was 'seeing a book/brand in a sponsored BookTube video influence me'. This was one of the original five statements and this statement was also altered to fit the research purposes.
      A factor analysis was performed on this seven-point Likert scale that measured the level of agreement with statements about sponsored BookTube videos. All nine items (including the items for eWOM scepticism and transparency of sponsored videos that will be mentioned further on) were entered into the factor analysis using the Principle Component Extraction with Varimax rotation that was based on Eigenvalues higher than 1.00, KMO = 0.67, X² (N = 875, 36) = 1777.34, p = < .001. The resultant model explained 63.3% of the variance in the level of agreement about statements on sponsored BookTube videos. The factor loadings of the individual items onto the three factors found are presented in Table 3. It was expected that the four items that were used to measure persuasion knowledge would be grouped in one factor, however, the item 'seeing a book/brand in a sponsored BookTube video influence me', was grouped in another factor. This will be explained in the next section. 
	The first factor, Persuasion Knowledge, consisted of three of the four items that were previously linked to persuasion knowledge, namely 'publishers/brands sponsor videos to encourage people to buy the book/brand', 'publishers/brands sponsor videos to make people think positively about the book/brand', and 'publishers/brands try to influence me by placing the book/brand in a context that I like' (M = 5.74, SD = 1.01). This new factor proved to be reliable (Cronbach's α = .77) and deleting an item would not have resulted in a higher reliability.  

EWOM scepticism
	EWOM scepticism was also measured on this seven-point Likert scale ranging from 'strongly disagree' to 'strongly agree'. The participants were asked to which degree they agree with the following two statements: 'I can depend on getting the truth in most sponsored BookTube videos' 
and 'I believe sponsored BookTube videos are informative'. These statements were based on statements that were firstly introduced by Obermiller and Spangenberg (1998) (Cronbach's α = .85) and they were altered to fit the research purposes of this research. 
	After performing the factor analysis on this scale, the second factor that was found included the items 'I can depend on getting the truth in most sponsored BookTube videos', 'I believe sponsored BookTube videos are informative', and, 'seeing a book/brand in a sponsored BookTube video influences me' (M = 4.22, SD = 1.14). As previously mentioned, it was expected that this last item would have been grouped in the first factor, however, it makes sense that it was grouped in this one, since it relates to the self-reflective nature of the items. Thus, this new factor was called EWOM Scepticism. In this variable, higher values mean that the viewer has less scepticism towards eWOM. This new factor proved to be reliable (Cronbach's α = .73) and deleting an item would only have resulted in a minimal positive change in the reliability, but since the reliability was already high, it was chosen not to delete this item. 

Transparency of sponsored videos
      Finally, the participants were asked to indicate the degree to which they agree with the following three statements about the transparency of sponsored videos: 'the BookTuber should clearly state/say that the video is sponsored', 'the BookTuber should clearly state/say that the opinions are their own', and 'the BookTuber should not make too many sponsored videos'. These three statements were designed by me.
      After performing the factor analysis, the third factor that was found included the following three items: 'the BookTuber should clearly state/say that the video is sponsored', 'the BookTuber should clearly state/say that the opinions are their own', and 'the BookTuber should not make too many sponsored videos' (M = 6.46, SD = 0.81). This new factor proved to have a very low reliability (Cronbach's α = .46). However, the reliability could have been improved to Cronbach's α = .62 if the item 'the BookTuber should not make too many sponsored videos' was deleted, thus it was chosen to delete this item from the factor.

Table 3: Factor and reliability analysis for Sponsored Videos (N=875). 
Items			                  Persuasion Knowledge      EWOM Scepticism           Transparency         
Publishers/brands sponsor videos		.857						
to make people think positively
about the book/brand

Publishers/brands sponsor videos		.806						
to encourage people to buy the
book/brand			

Publishers/brands try to influence		.785						
me by placing the book/brand in a 
context that I like	

I believe sponsored BookTube					  .865
videos are informative	

I can depend on getting the truth				  .829
in most sponsored BookTube videos					   		

Seeing a book/brand in a sponsored				  .675
BookTube video influences me			

The BookTuber should clearly state/							.828
say that the opinions are their own

The BookTuber should clearly state/							.817
say that the video is sponsored					   
 
The BookTuber should not make				  -.324			.472
too many sponsored videos				   
					

R²					27.22%			21.08%			15.04%	     
Cronbach's α 				.77			.73           		.62	        
Note: factor loadings <.30 are suppressed. Factor loadings presented in bold indicate which items belong to which factor. 


3.3.6 Book buying behaviour and reading habits
      Both the book buying behaviour and the reading habits were measured using the questions "approximately how many books have you bought in the last 2 months?" and "approximately how many books have you read in the last 2 months?". It is decided to use an open question format, because using, for example, an answer scale that ranged from 'several times a day' to 'several times a year' would probably have resulted in an overestimation of the self-reported answers of the respondents, which means that it would not have been reliable. It is argued that vague answer options present an additional challenge for estimating behaviour (De Vreese & Neijens, 2016). In addition, an open-ended question format was used to obtain a ratio level of measurement. More detailed questions regarding the book buying behaviour were 'where do you mostly get your books from?' after which the participants could select up to two of the following answers: 'bookstore', 'second hand bookstore', 'library', 'online web shop', 'online download', 'friends and family', or 'other'. In addition, another question focused on other places where the participants find information about which new books to read/buy. This question allowed them to select up to three of the following answers: 'Goodreads', 'blogs', 'Instagram', 'Twitter', 'Facebook', 'newspapers/magazines', 'recommendations from friends and family', 'in bookstores', and 'other'. Since people who watch BookTube videos already find information about new books on YouTube itself, the option to select 'YouTube' was excluded from this question, however, people who do not watch BookTube videos were exposed to the same question that did include the option to answer 'YouTube', since they may not specifically watch BookTube videos, but may have other ways on YouTube to find information about which new books to read and buy. 
      Exploring the reading habits of the participants was also measured by means of more detailed questions such as 'what genres do you read most?' and 'what book format do you read most often?'. The question about the genres that the participants read most often was a multiple-choice question which allowed the participants to select up to three out of the 15 genres. These 15 genres were derived from the website Goodreads, which, as previously mentioned, is one of the biggest online book websites that allows its users to track their reading and create online bookshelves. A 16th answer category was added that allowed the participants to type a genre that was not mentioned in the list. The question about the book format that the participants read most often allowed them pick one of the three options: 'physical book', 'Ebook', or 'audiobook', since these are the three main book formats that are currently available.   
      Since this research compares people who do watch BookTube videos versus people who do not watch these videos, it was necessary to compute the variable of how many books people have read in the last two months and combine the data of these two groups together into one new variable. This action was also necessary for the variable of how many books people have bought in the last two months. After computing the variable of how many books people have read in the last two months, this variable appeared to have a high kurtosis of 14.43. Even though a high kurtosis can result in an underestimate of the variance, it is not seen as a serious problem, since this risk can be reduced when the sample size is larger than 200 cases (Tabachnick, Fidell, & Ullman, 2007). Since the sample size for this question was 1259, it was not a problem to leave the variable like this. However, for the sake of research it was important to try to minimise the kurtosis, thus it was decided to transform the variable and apply a square root transformation to the variable. This change proved to be successful, since the kurtosis was decreased to 1.42.  
      A problem of a high kurtosis, as well as a high skewness, also occurred at the computed variable of how many books people have bought in the last two months, since the skewness was 4.76 and the kurtosis was 46.03. Again, it was decided to transform this variable and apply a log transformation in order to try to minimise the skewness and kurtosis. This transformation proved to be successful as well, with a new skewness of .1 and a new kurtosis of 0.17. However, this transformation resulted in the sample size decreasing from 1258 to 1142, since many cases now ended up with a negative value. In order to solve this problem, the new variable was transformed again. During the transformation, a value of 1 was added to all the cases, which resulted in there being no more negative cases and thus, the entire sample of 1258 for this question could be used for further analysis. 

3.4 Data collection and analysis
      As mentioned earlier, the survey was distributed amongst the participants via various social media channels. The three biggest social media channels that drove participants to the survey were YouTube, on which 468 participants (37%) encountered the survey, Twitter, which gathered 426 participants (33.7%), and Facebook, with 221 participants (17.5%). The remaining participants encountered the survey via other online platforms or via friends and family. It is clear that YouTube and Twitter were the main platforms that drove the participants to the survey and this is not surprising, since it is about BookTube, thus it was expected that YouTube would be a main source. Furthermore, since it was shared over 150 times on Twitter it is also not surprising to see the extensive number of participants that encountered the survey via Twitter. The survey was conducted from April 17th 2019 to April 18th 2019, since enough respondents were already gathered within the first 12 hours. 

3.4.1 Data analysis
	The data for this research was collected by means of an online survey using Qualtrics and was later analysed using the SPSS Statistics software. First of all, the data was thoroughly cleaned and incomplete answers were deleted from the data set. Afterwards, a number of factor analyses were conducted in order to see whether certain items could be reduced to factors. Next, the reliability of these new factors was tested as well in order to ensure that the new scales were reliable. 
	In order to test the hypotheses, multiple statistical tests were used: multiple hierarchical regression analyses, ANOVAs, independent samples T-tests and Chi Square tests.
3.5 Validity and reliability
	In order to ensure a high level of validity, meaning that this research measures what it intended to measure (Matthews & Ross, 2014), the concepts that were of importance to this research were thoroughly explored, defined, and operationalised. Thus, the conceptualisations in this research were based on previous research that had been done in similar fields, such as eWOM and buying behaviour. One possible threat to the validity of this research is the fact that the sample may be slightly biased to the characteristics of my own viewers in relation to the general BookTube viewing population, since this survey was distributed through online channels which were mainly followed by my viewers. However, since the link to the survey was shared many times, the survey was exposed to more viewers outside of my own followers.
	The reliability of this research depended on the measurement scales that were used to measure the data. As mentioned before, all measurement scales were tested for their reliability to ensure that the reliability was high enough for further analyses. A good reliability would ensure that when a different researcher was to carry out this research, the findings would be similar (Matthews & Ross, 2014). One aspect of this research that could have influenced the reliability is the issue of the social desirability bias. Even though in the survey much emphasis was put on the anonymity of the survey, it cannot be ruled out that no participant felt the need to answer the questions in such a way that it would have a favourable outcome. 
	Finally, an ethical concern could be that the viewers of my BookTube videos may have felt pressured to participate in this survey, however, it was conveyed that participating in this survey was a completely voluntary act.

	












4. Results 

	In this chapter, the results that were derived from the data analyses performed in SPSS will be described and presented in detail. All the tests were analysed with a confidence level of 95% (p < .05). The results will be presented in the same order in which the hypotheses were stated in the theoretical framework of this study and each hypothesis will be discussed in detail and will be either accepted or rejected. 

4.1 Book buying behaviour of BookTube viewers
	The first three hypotheses all relate to the book buying behaviour, thus the number of books that are purchased, of BookTube viewers and were thus able to be tested by a single hierarchical regression analysis with five independent variables: motivation for information, motivation for community, motivation for entertainment, number of videos watched, and source credibility.

4.1.1 Motivations for watching BookTube videos in relation to book purchasing
	The first hypothesis of this study assumes that BookTube viewers' need for information is positively related to book purchasing (H1). It was chosen to use a hierarchical regression analysis in order to test this hypothesis, because it then not only allowed to test the motivation variable, but it was also able to show whether age, gender, and education, as well as the motivations for entertainment and community add predictive value. As mentioned, one hierarchical regression analysis was used to test the first three hypotheses of this study. The following two hypotheses will be explained further on.
	First of all, the variables to test the first hypothesis were checked for the assumptions of normality by analysing the skewness and the kurtosis by means of checking the descriptives for each continuous variable. Both the skewness and kurtosis of the variable for the number of books that were bought by BookTube viewers in the last two months were high; respectively 2.88 and 12.58, thus it was decided to transform this variable by adding 1 to all the values and applying a natural log. After that, the skewness and kurtosis decreased to respectively -.18 and -.10. Both the variables motivation for community and motivation for entertainment were normally distributed, however, the variable for motivation for information had a slightly high kurtosis of 5.15, but since this test included 952 cases, the risk for the underestimate of the variance that a high kurtosis can cause was reduced (Tabachnick et al., 2007) and it was thus decided to continue using this variable without transforming it. 
      The control variables age, gender, and education were entered in the first block and the variables for motivation for information, entertainment, and community, as well as the variables for the number of videos watched and source credibility were entered in the second block. For beta coefficients and values for the explained variance of the regression analysis, see Table 1.

Model 1	
      The regression model 1 of the number of books bought by BookTube viewers as the dependent variable and age, gender, and education as the independent variables proved to be significant, F(3, 948) = 10.94, p < .001, R2 = .03. When the demographic for age, gender, and education were used as single predictors for the book buying behaviour, 3% of the variance was explained. The first regression model is thus useful for predicting the number of books bought by BookTube viewers, but the predictive power is low: 3 percent of the difference in the number of books bought can be predicted based on age, gender, and education (R2 = 0.03). Age, b*=.11, t = 3.07, p =.002, (SE = .01), gender, b*=.06, t = 2.00, p =.046, (SE = .11), and education, b*=.11, t = 3.03, p =.003, (SE = .08) have a significant weak positive correlation with the book buying behaviour of BookTube viewers. Every year of increase in age leads to an increase of 2.0% in the number of books someone buys. On average, females buy 25.9% more books than men, and lastly, for every increase in educational level, the number of books bought by BookTube viewers tends to increase with 8.3%. For all of these effects, it is assumed that the other independent variables remain constant. The coefficients in this model are also interpreted in percentage increases, since the dependent variable was log transformed.

Model 2
      The second regression model, in which the independent variables for motivation for information, entertainment, and community, as well as the variables for number of videos watched and source credibility were added resulted in a significant change in explained variance, F(5, 943) = 7.17, p <.001, ΔR2 =.04. This model also explains only a small part of the variance in the books bought by BookTube viewers, namely 6.1%, which is low. However, the result is statistically significant. The motivations for entertainment and community have no significant predictive value. Motivation for information does have a significant result, b*=.09, t = 2.68, p =.007, (SE = .04), which means that the motivation for information has a statistically significant weak positive correlation with the book buying behaviour of BookTube viewers. For each additional point on the motivation for information scale, which goes from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree), the number of books bought by BookTube viewers increases with 10.5%. With these findings, H1 can be accepted, however, the motivation for information is a weak positive predictor for the book buying behaviour of BookTube viewers. 

4.1.2 BookTube viewing in relation to book buying behaviour
      The second hypothesis of this study assumes that BookTube viewing is positively related to book purchasing (H2), thus the more BookTube videos people watch, the more books they purchase. First of all, the variables were checked for normality. As previously mentioned, the variable for book purchasing had already been transformed in order for it to be normally distributed. The variable that showed the number of videos BookTube viewers had watched in the past four weeks proved to have a high skewness and kurtosis of respectively 4.40 and 25.42, thus it was also decided to transform this variable by adding 1 to each value and by applying a natural log. After the transformation, the skewness and kurtosis decreased to respectively -.14 and .27. The hierarchical regression that was previously mentioned was also used to test this hypothesis. For beta coefficients and values for the explained variance of the regression analysis, see Table 1. 
      As previously mentioned, model 1, with the independent variables of age, gender, and education, proved to result in a significant change. For more information about model 1, please refer back to H1. In model 2, with the additional independent variables, the number of videos that were watched by BookTube viewers in the past four weeks proves to have a significant predictive value for the book buying behaviour of the viewers. Videos watched, b*=.15, t = 4.19, p <.001, (SE = .03), which means that it has a significant weak positive correlation with the book buying behaviour of BookTube viewers. By performing a median split, a distinction was made between light viewers and heavy viewers, with a median of 30. A t-test showed that heavy viewers who watch more than 30 videos every 4 weeks buy significantly more books every two months (M = 10.39, SD = 12.02) than light viewers do (M = 7.96, SD = 8.56), t(866.165) = -3.65, p < .001. With these findings, H2 can be accepted, thus the more videos viewers watch, the more books they buy.  
      Additionally, to explore the topic of the book buying behaviour even further, an independent samples t-test was performed to explore the difference in the number of books that BookTube viewers and non-BookTube viewers purchase over the span of two months. A t-test showed that BookTube viewers purchase significantly more books (M = 1.90, SD = .93) than people who do not watch BookTube videos (M = 1.68, SD = .96), t(1256) = -3.48, p =.001. Since the original variable for the number of books that were purchased in the last two months was transformed by adding 1 to all the values and applying a natural log, the following values are from the original variable to get a better understanding of the true means. BookTube viewers (M = 9.15, SD = 10.46) and non-BookTube viewers (M = 7.79, SD = 13.60).

4.1.3 Source credibility	
      The third hypothesis of this study assumes that the level of perceived credibility of the BookTuber is positively related to book purchasing (H3), thus the more credible a viewer perceives BookTubers to be, the more books the BookTube viewer tends to purchase. Again, the first hierarchical regression analysis was used to test this hypothesis. As previously mentioned, model 1, with the independent variables of age, gender, and education, proved to result in a significant change. For more information about model 1, please refer back to H1. In model 2, with the additional independent variables, the source credibility of the BookTubers proves to have a significant predictive value for the book buying behaviour of the viewers. Source credibility, b*=.10, t = 2.63, p =.009, (SE = .07), which means that it has a significant weak positive correlation with the book buying behaviour of BookTube viewers. For each additional point on the source credibility scale, which goes from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree), the number of books bought by BookTube viewers increases with 20.9%. With these findings, H3 can be accepted, however, the source credibility is a weak predictor for the book buying behaviour of BookTube viewers. 
      In order to explore the source credibility of the BookTubers in more detail it was decided to also test all the factors for source credibility (expertness, trustworthiness, and relatable) separately. The trustworthiness of the BookTuber does have a statistically significant predictive value for book purchasing, b*=.08, t = 2.02, p =.044, (SE = .07). However, the other variables for source credibility, namely expertness and relatable, are found not to be significant predictors for the book buying behaviour of BookTube viewers. 
      
Table 1 - Regression model for predicting book purchasing (N = 952)
					Model 1		Model 2
Predictor				   b*			   b*			
Age					.11**			.11**			
Education				.11**			.11**			
Gender					.06*			.06			
Source credibility						.10**
Videos watched							.15***
Information motivation						.09**			
Entertainment motivation					-.10			
Community motivation						-.01
R2 					 .03			.07	
F					10.94			8.72		
ΔR2 								.04
ΔF								7.17***
p					<.001			<.001
Table 1. Standardised beta coefficients and R2 of the hierarchical regression analysis. 
Note: *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

4.2 Book format
	The fourth hypothesis assumes that there is a relationship between watching BookTube videos and reading physical books instead of ebooks or audiobooks (H4), thus the more BookTube videos a viewer watches, the more likely they are to read physical books instead of ebooks or audiobooks. A Chi-square test was used to compare the two groups (people who watch BookTube videos and people who do not watch BookTube videos) in relation to their preferred reading format. 	
	The Chi-square test revealed that watching BookTube videos is related to the preferred reading format. χ2 (N = 1264, 2) = 29.79, p <.001. Of the people who watch BookTube videos, 82.3% prefer to read physical books, compared to 60.7% of people who do not watch BookTube videos. Thus, H4 can be accepted. In addition, ebooks are more popular amongst people who do not watch BookTube videos, since 34.9% of these people primarily read ebooks, compared to 12% of people who do watch BookTube videos. Finally, audiobooks as a preferred reading format are similar between both groups, with 5.7% of BookTube viewers and 4.4% of people who do not watch BookTube videos. 
	In addition, results show that teens and young adults (people to the age of 35) significantly read more physical books than older people do (people older than 35). A Chi-square test namely revealed that being a teen or a young adult is related to predominantly reading physical books χ2 (N = 1259, 2) = 56.69, p < 0.001. The results show that of the teens and young adults, 80.8% read physical books, compared to only 57.6% of the older people.   

4.3 Sponsored BookTube videos
	The following two hypotheses concern the perception of sponsored videos and they focus on the persuasion knowledge of the viewers and the attitudes of the viewers towards these videos. 

4.3.1 Persuasion knowledge
      The fifth hypothesis assumes that older BookTube viewers have a higher persuasion knowledge than younger BookTube viewers (H5). A multiple hierarchical regression analysis was used with the control variables gender and education. Thus, gender and education were entered in block 1 and age was entered in block 2. Before performing the regression analysis, the variables were tested for the assumption of normality. Both models in the hierarchical regression analysis proved not to be significant, thus age is no indicator for persuasion knowledge and H5 has to be rejected. For beta coefficients and values for the explained variance of the regression analysis, see Table 2. 











Table 2 - Regression model for persuasion knowledge (N = 871)
					Model 1		Model 2
Predictor				   b*			   b*				
Education				.06			.04			
Gender					.05			.05			
Age								.06
R2 					 .01			.01	
F					2.60			2.52		
ΔR2 								.00
ΔF								2.36
p					.075			.125
Table 2. Standardised beta coefficients and R2 of the hierarchical regression analysis. 
Note: *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

4.3.2 Attitude towards sponsored BookTube videos
	The sixth hypothesis assumes that the attitude towards sponsored BookTube videos is positively related to purchasing books (H6). For this study, the attitude towards sponsored BookTube videos was tested using the variable for the eWOM Scepticism of the viewers, since this variable focuses on the self-reflective nature of watching sponsored videos. Thus, viewers argue whether they can depend on getting the truth in sponsored BookTube videos, whether they think sponsored BookTube videos are informative, and whether they think that they are influenced by these sponsored BookTube videos. 
	Before performing the simple regression analysis, the variables were tested for the assumption of normality. A simple regression analysis with the eWOM Scepticism score as the criterion and the number of books bought by BookTube viewers as the predictor was conducted. The model was not found to be significant, F(1, 868) = .05, p = .833, R2 = .00. The level of eWOM scepticism thus has no significant influence on the book buying behaviour (r* = 0.01, p = .833). For beta coefficients and values for the explained variance of the regression analysis, see Table 3. With these findings, H6 must be rejected. 








Table 3 - Regression model for predicting book purchasing (N = 866)
					Model 1		
Predictor				   b*			  			  
eWOM scepticism			.01
R2  					.00
F					.05
p					.833
Table 3. Standardised beta coefficients and R2 of the regression analysis. 
Note: *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

4.4 Book genres
	The seventh hypothesis assumes that the genre Young Adult will be more popular amongst BookTube viewers compared to people who do not watch BookTube videos (H7). A Chi-square test was used to compare the two groups (people who watch BookTube videos and people who do not watch BookTube videos) in relation to considering YA to be one of their favourite book genres. 	
	The Chi-square test revealed that watching BookTube videos is related to the likelihood of considering YA as a favourite book genre. χ2 (N = 1264, 1) = 117.71, p <.001. Of the people who watch BookTube videos, 67.2% consider YA to be one of their favourite book genres, whereas of the people who do not watch BookTube videos, only 30.9% consider YA to be a favourite. Thus, H7 can be accepted. A possible reason that could explain this result is the average age of the people who do and do not watch BookTube videos. In this study, the average age of people who watch BookTube videos is 23.7 (SD = 6.32), whereas the average age of people who do not watch BookTube videos is 37.4 (SD = 13.54). Therefore, it is not surprising to see that YA is more popular amongst BookTube viewers, since this genre is targeted more to younger people. For an overview of the other genres, please see Table 4.
	Other genres that also prove to be more popular amongst people who watch BookTube videos are the following four: Fantasy, χ2 (N = 1264, 1) = 117.19, p <.001. Of the people who watch BookTube videos, 70.3% consider Fantasy to be one of their favourite book genres, whereas of the people who do not watch BookTube videos, only 34.5% consider Fantasy to be a favourite. Science Fiction, χ2 (N = 1264, 1) = 8.73, p = .003. Of the people who watch BookTube videos, 18% consider Science Fiction to be one of their favourite book genres, whereas of the people who do not watch BookTube videos, 10.5% consider Science Fiction to be a favourite. Adult, χ2 (N = 1264, 1) = 6.82, p = .009. Of the people who watch BookTube videos, 18.3% consider Adult to be one of their favourite book genres, whereas of the people who do not watch BookTube videos, 11.6% consider Adult to be a favourite. Graphic Novels/Manga, χ2 (N = 1264, 1) = 12.89, p <.001. Of the people who watch BookTube videos, 9.6% consider Graphic Novels/Manga to be one of their favourite book genres, whereas of the people who do not watch BookTube videos, only 2.9% consider Graphic Novels/Manga to be a favourite.
	The following six genres prove to be more popular amongst people who do not watch BookTube videos: Self Help, χ2 (N = 1264, 1) = 12.26, p <.001. Of the people who watch BookTube videos, 1.5% consider Self Help to be one of their favourite book genres, whereas of the people who do not watch BookTube videos, 5.1% consider Self Help to be a favourite. Non-Fiction, χ2 (N = 1264, 1) = 37.29, p <.001. Of the people who watch BookTube videos, only 8.8% consider Non-Fiction to be one of their favourite book genres, whereas of the people who do not watch BookTube videos, 22.2% consider Non-Fiction to be a favourite. Horror, χ2 (N = 1264, 1) = 8.53, p = .003. Of the people who watch BookTube videos, 3.5% consider Horror to be one of their favourite book genres, whereas of the people who do not watch BookTube videos, 7.6% consider Horror to be a favourite. Thriller, χ2 (N = 1264, 1) = 86.83, p <.001. Of the people who watch BookTube videos, only 15.3% consider Thriller to be one of their favourite book genres, whereas of the people who do not watch BookTube videos, 41.1% consider Thriller to be a favourite. Historical Fiction, χ2 (N = 1264, 1) = 46.70, p <.001. Of the people who watch BookTube videos, 12.8% consider Historical Fiction to be one of their favourite book genres, whereas of the people who do not watch BookTube videos, 30.2% consider Historical Fiction to be a favourite. Finally, Romance, χ2 (N = 1264, 1) = 11.42, p = .001. Of the people who watch BookTube videos, 12.6% consider Romance to be one of their favourite book genres, whereas of the people who do not watch BookTube videos, 20.7% consider Romance to be a favourite. 

Table 4 - Chi-square test for favourite book genres (N = 1264)
					BookTube Viewer	Non-BookTube viewer	           p
Young Adult					67.2%			30.9%		       <.001
Fantasy					70.3%			34.5%		       <.001
Science Fiction					18%			10.5%	 	       .003
Adult						18.3%			11.6%		       .009
Graphic Novels / Manga			9.6%			2.9%		       <.001
Self Help					1.5%			5.1%		       <.001
Non-Fiction					8.8%			22.2%		       <.001
Horror						3.5%			7.6%		       .003
Thriller					15.3%			41.1%		       <.001
Historical Fiction				12.8%			30.2%		       <.001
Romance					12.6%			20.7%		       .001
Note: values presented in bold indicate which group had the highest percentage.



4.5 Exploratory analyses 
	The following section contains a variety of tests that are done to explore the BookTube phenomenon and the book buying behaviour and reading habits of both BookTube viewers and non-BookTube viewers in more detail. These tests are of great importance, since hardly any social scientific research has been done on BookTube. The following results will therefore fill part of this research gap. 

4.5.1 BookTube viewers vs. non-BookTube viewers
      One of the aims of this study is to answer the sub-question "what is the relationship of the book buying behaviour and the reading habits between people who do watch BookTube videos and people who do not?", thus comparing the number of books that people who do watch BookTube videos and people who do not watch BookTube videos purchase and read in the span of two months. However, since BookTube is still a rather unexplored part of social scientific research, no hypotheses were derived from past research. Therefore, some exploratory tests were performed to compare both the book buying behaviour and reading habits between these two groups. As mentioned earlier, BookTube viewers purchase significantly more books than non-BookTube viewers, however, further tests can be done to also test the difference in the number of books they read.
	Firstly, an independent samples t-test was performed to explore the difference in the number of books that BookTube viewers and non-BookTube viewers read over the span of two months. A t-test showed that BookTube viewers read significantly more books (M = 3.30, SD = 1.25) than people who do not watch BookTube videos (M = 2.51, SD = 1.11), t(478.845) = -10.06, p <.001.
Again, the following values are from the original variable: BookTube viewers (M = 12.43, SD = 9.82) and non-BookTube viewers (M = 7.55, SD = 7.08).
	Secondly, A Chi-square test revealed that watching BookTube videos is related to buying books in a bookstore χ2 (N = 1264, 1) = 6.05, p = 0.014. Of the people who watch BookTube videos, 60.3% most often buy books in a bookstore, compared to 52% of people who do not watch BookTube videos.
	In conclusion, these results answer the sub-question of what the relationship is of the book buying behaviour and reading habits between people who do watch BookTube videos and people who do not watch these videos, namely that BookTube viewers both purchase and read more books than non-BookTube viewers do, and that BookTube viewers are also more likely to purchase their books in a bookstore. 

4.5.2 Likeliness of purchasing books
      The second sub-question is "to what extent are viewers likely to purchase a book that a BookTuber talks positively about in one of their videos?". By analysing the data it became clear that on a scale from 1 (extremely unlikely) to 7 (extremely likely) the mean answer to this question was 5.38, which means that BookTube viewers are between slightly likely and moderately likely to purchase a book after a BookTuber talks positively about it. Interesting is, is that after seeing a book being featured in a sponsored video, the mean answer to this question, which was made up of the same scale from 1 (extremely unlikely) to 7 (extremely likely), was 3.79. This means that BookTube viewers were slightly unlikely to not unlikely nor likely to purchase a book after watching a sponsored video. By performing a paired samples t-test, it became clear that there was a statistically significant difference in the scores for how likely BookTube viewers are to purchase a book after a BookTuber talks positively about it (M = 5.38, SD = 1.19) and for how likely BookTube viewers are to purchase a book after seeing it being featured in a sponsored video (M = 3.79, SD = 1.37); t(874)=31.461, p <.001. BookTube viewers are thus more likely to purchase a book after watching a regular BookTube video than after watching a sponsored BookTube video. 

4.5.3 Popular books on BookTube
	When the respondents were asked to state the most recent book they purchased because of BookTube, there were a number of books that stood out from the rest, namely The Priory of the Orange Tree by Samantha Shannon and Daisy Jones & The Six by Taylor Jenkins Reid. These books were bought by BookTube viewers respectively 44 and 43 times. Both of these books were released in 2019 and are thus still new releases. In addition, it is clear that many BookTubers talk about these books, since the search results of 'The Priory of the Orange Tree' and 'Daisy Jones & The Six' result in hundreds of videos on YouTube. Thus, it is clear that BookTube viewers may be influenced by the many times that these books are discussed by BookTubers.     

4.5.4 Reading habits of BookTube viewers
      Finally, a hierarchical regression analysis was performed to explore whether there is a relationship between the number of BookTube videos that a viewer watches and the number of books that a viewer reads. First of all, the variable was checked for the assumptions of normality by analysing the skewness and the kurtosis by means of checking the descriptives for the continuous variable books read. Both the skewness and kurtosis of the variable for the number of books that were read by BookTube viewers in the last two months were high; respectively 2.59 and 14.80, thus it was decided to transform this variable by adding 1 to all the values and applying a natural log. After that, the skewness and kurtosis decreased to respectively -.16 and .26. The control variables age, gender, and education were entered in the first block and the variable books read was entered in the second block. For beta coefficients and values for the explained variance of the regression analysis, see Table 5. 



Model 1	
      The regression model 1 of the number of books read by BookTube viewers as the dependent variable and age, gender, and education as the independent variables proved to be significant, F(3, 949) = 4.64, p = .003, R2 = .01. When the demographic for age, gender, and education are used as single predictors for the books that are read by BookTube viewers, 1.4% of the variance is explained. The first regression model is thus useful for predicting the number of books read by BookTube viewers, but the predictive power is low: 1.4 percent of the difference in the number of books bought can be predicted based on age, gender, and education (R2 = 0.01). Age, b*=.07, t = 2.02, p =.044, (SE = .00) and gender, b*=.09, t = 2.63, p =.009, (SE = .08) have a significant weak positive correlation with the number of books read by BookTube viewers. Education does not have a significant correlation with the number of books read by BookTube viewers. Every year of increase in age leads to an increase of 0.7% in the number of books someone reads. On average, females read 24.2% more books than men.

Model 2
      The second regression model, in which the independent variable videos watched was added resulted in a significant change in explained variance, F(1, 948) = 75.18, p <.001, ΔR2 =.07. This model also explains a small part of the variance in the books read by BookTube viewers, namely 8.7%, which is low. However, the result is statistically significant. The number of videos watched has a significant result, b*=.27, t = 8.67, p <.000, (SE = .02), which means that the number of BookTube videos watched has a statistically significant weak positive correlation with the number of books read by BookTube viewers. 















Table 5 - Regression model for predicting book reading (N = 989)
					Model 1		Model 2
Predictor				   b*			   b*			
Age					.07*			.07*			
Education				.04			.04			
Gender					.09**			.07*			
Videos watched							.27***
R2 					 .01			.09	
F					4.64			22.55		
ΔR2 								.07
ΔF								75.18***
p					.003			<.001
Table 5. Standardised beta coefficients and R2 of the hierarchical regression analysis. 
Note: *p < .05, **p < .01, ***p < .001

      The following chapter will discuss these results in more detail and will answer the research question of this research.


















5. Conclusion & Discussion 
	Based on the analyses of the online survey and literature, the following chapter will provide a discussion of the results, as well as address any limitations of this research and suggestions for future research. 	

5.1 Main findings
	The objective of this study is to answer the research question "to what extent does watching BookTube videos relate to the book buying behaviour and the reading habits of its viewers?". Results show that watching BookTube videos has a significant positive relationship with the number of books a viewer purchases and reads, thus the more BookTube videos a viewer watches, the more books they purchase and read. In addition, the motivation for information is positively related to book buying, whereas the entertainment and community motivations are not.

5.2 Theoretical implications
	The following section of this research addresses each accepted and rejected hypothesis in order of appearance in the theoretical framework and will thus answer the research question of "to what extent does watching BookTube videos relate to the book buying behaviour and the reading habits of its viewers?" in more detail.

5.2.1 Book buying behaviour of BookTube viewers 
	The hypothesis that assumes that BookTube viewers' need for information is positively related to book purchasing (H1) is accepted, thus it can be said that viewers whose motivation it is to watch BookTube videos in order to gain information about new books on the market buy significantly more books than when their motivation to watch BookTube videos is either to be entertained or to acquire a feeling of community. This relationship between the need for information and the purchasing of products is what The Benchmarking Company (2016) also argued, since they concluded that 88% of cosmetic users spend time online before deciding to purchase a specific product. This time spent online is used to find out information about said cosmetic products. It is interesting to note that this thus also accounts for books and that readers who spend time online to find out information about new books eventually purchase more books. However, as mentioned in the results section of this study, acquiring information as a motivation to watch BookTube videos is not the only aspect that is related to purchasing books; the age and educational level of BookTube viewers is also related to purchasing books. 
	The second hypothesis that assumes that BookTube viewing is positively related to book buying (H2) is accepted as well, thus is can be concluded that the more BookTube videos a viewer watches, the more books they purchase. This can be linked back to Pelixo's (2018) study about eWOM in which he argues that expectations that are created by watching eWOM videos are related to purchase decisions after watching these videos, thus the more BookTube videos someone watches, the more of these expectations are presented that thus influence the purchase decisions of the viewers. In addition, this result is related to a study by Varma Citrin et al. (2000) in which they came to the conclusion that higher levels of internet usage result in a higher level of electronic commerce. It can thus be concluded that internet usage is related to the purchase behaviour of its users. In this study, however, watching BookTube videos was not necessarily related to a higher level of electronic commerce, since it became clear that people who watch BookTube videos tend to buy more books from a bookstore, compared to people who do not watch BookTube videos. This conclusion can be linked with the fact that it is argued that people who watch BookTube videos want to be surrounded by physical books, since being part of the BookTube community makes the viewers want to purchase and own a lot of books (Ehret et al., 2018), thus it is not surprising to see that BookTube viewers want to be surrounded by physical books when purchasing books. It can therefore be argued that people who do not watch BookTube videos do not have the urge to be surrounded by physical books as much as BookTube viewers do. 
	The third hypothesis argues that the level of perceived credibility of the BookTuber is positively related to book purchasing (H3) and this hypothesis is also accepted. Thus, there is a relationship between the perceived credibility of the BookTuber and the likeliness that the viewer will purchase a book after watching a video. The perceived source credibility is of great importance in order to achieve a high level of communication effectiveness, as was argued by Hovland and Weiss (1951). Thus, it can be said that BookTubers who are perceived as being a credible source of information have the ability to create more effective messages which have a positive effect on the book buying behaviour of the viewers. 
	Next, the hypothesis that assumes that there is a relationship between watching BookTube videos and reading physical books instead of ebooks or audiobooks (H4) is accepted as well, thus it is proven that people who watch BookTube videos are more likely to read physical books instead of ebooks and audiobooks. A reason for this is that the BookTubers that the viewers like to watch are seen as big influencers and as examples. As argued by Westenberg, (2016), much attention is given to the personalities of these big influencers and the viewers are striving to be like them. It is thus clear that viewers want to be similar to them, because these BookTubers often have big bookshelves full of physical books, and as mentioned, BookTube viewers purchase more physical books compared to people who do not watch BookTube videos. 

5.2.2 Sponsored BookTube videos
	The fifth hypothesis, that assumes that older BookTube viewers have a higher persuasion knowledge than younger BookTube viewers (H5) is rejected. Thus, the older someone gets is not an indicator for the persuasion knowledge of that person. As was mentioned by Boerman et al. (2018), persuasion knowledge is a learning process that develops throughout the course of a lifetime, however, this does not prove to be true in the case of BookTube viewers. This is an interesting finding, since it was expected to be true, however, a possible reason for this could be that BookTube viewers may think that publishers genuinely want to share their newest books and stories with the rest of the world instead of only trying to make money by sponsoring BookTubers. 
	The hypothesis that assumes that the attitude towards sponsored BookTube videos is positively related to purchasing books (H6) is also rejected. The outcomes of these tests prove not to be significant, thus the self-reflective attitude towards sponsored videos are not related to purchasing books. Surprisingly, Mehta (2000) argued that the purchase intention of people who feel that advertising is a truthful and informational source of information is positively influenced by these factors, however, this study concludes that BookTube viewers perceiving sponsored videos as being truthful or informational is not positively related to their purchase intention. Since these results contradict each other, it is important that further research is done to clarify this contradiction and explore it in more detail. A possible reason for this could be that BookTube viewers generally have a negative attitude towards sponsored videos, even though they might find the information to be truthful or informational. Even though the BookTuber may specifically say that it is their own opinion about the books that they are sharing in a sponsored video, the viewers may still prefer to buy books that BookTubers talk about at their own will. This can be linked to the results that show that viewers are less likely to purchase a book that was mentioned in a sponsored video. 

5.2.3 Book genres
	The final hypothesis, that assumes that the genre Young Adult will be more popular amongst BookTube viewers compared to people who do not watch BookTube videos (H7) is accepted. Therefore, it can be argued that YA is in fact more popular amongst BookTube viewers compared to people who do not watch BookTube videos, as was also argued by Hughes (2017). As mentioned in the results, it is not surprising that YA is more popular amongst BookTube viewers, since the participants who watch BookTube videos have a lower mean age than people who do not watch BookTube videos do and the YA genre is targeted more towards younger people. However, Springen (2012) argued that adults might feel embarrassed for reading YA books, which means that this could have been a reason that in this survey older people may not have stated YA to be one of their favourite genres. Even though the survey explicitly stated that it was completely anonymous, these things can still occur. A suggestion for future research is to make sure that the mean age of people who watch BookTube videos and people who do not watch BookTube videos is similar, which means that the comparison between these two groups in terms of their favourite genre will not be influenced by their age, but solely their reading tastes.  


5.3 Exploratory analyses
	The following section of this research will provide implications for the exploratory analyses that were performed in order to fill the research gap in research about BookTube.

5.3.1 BookTube viewers vs. non-BookTube viewers 
      In order to answer the sub-question question "what is the relationship of the book buying behaviour and the reading habits between people who do watch BookTube videos and people who do not?", some comparative tests were performed and the results show that BookTube viewers purchase and read more books compared to people who do not watch BookTube videos. This is an important realisation, since it can thus be argued that watching BookTube videos is positively related to both purchasing and reading books, and that the exposure to eWOM messages is related to purchase decisions, as mentioned in Jin and Phua, (2014). 
      	
5.3.2 Likeliness of purchasing books
	The results show that BookTube viewers are more likely to purchase a book after watching a regular video compared to watching a sponsored video in which the book that is featured is sponsored by a publisher or brand. Therefore, it can be concluded that BookTube viewers are more sceptical towards the information that is being given in sponsored videos and that they are less likely to purchase a book after watching a sponsored video compared to regular BookTube videos. The reason for this result can be linked to what is argued by Camargo and Ciareto (2016), since they say that BookTube viewers are more likely to purchase a new book after watching a BookTube video if they relate to the BookTuber on a personal level and if they value their opinion. Thus, sponsored videos might affect the credibility of the BookTuber, since viewers may not value their opinion as much when they are being paid by a brand or publisher to talk about a specific book, however, future research must look into this further. 

5.3.3 Popular books on BookTube
      As mentioned in the theoretical framework, BookTubers have the ability to influence which books become popular in the BookTube community (Hein, 2017; Hughes, 2017). This also becomes clear when reviewing the results, since there are two books that are recently purchased significantly more than other books, namely Daisy Jones & The Six by Taylor Jenkins Reid and The Priory of the Orange Tree by Samantha Shannon. Both of these books are recent releases from 2019 and apparently, they are talked about a lot on BookTube, since 44 people recently bought The Priory of the Orange Tree and 43 people recently bought Daisy Jones & The Six after being exposed to these books on BookTube. Thus, it can be argued that there is a relationship between the books that are talked about a lot by BookTubers and books that become popular in the BookTube community, however, no statistical tests were able to prove this claim, thus it is advised that future research must look into this claim further in order to scientifically prove or disprove the fact that BookTubers are able to make books more popular.

5.3.4 Reading habits of BookTube viewers
	Finally, the number of books that are read by BookTube viewers in relation to the number of BookTube videos that are watched by them show a significant positive correlation, which means that the more BookTube videos someone watches, the more books they read. This result was to be expected, since it is necessary to purchase books before reading them, however, another possible outcome could have been that BookTube viewers do purchase a lot of books, but end up not reading as many books as they purchase, which again can be linked to the theory that BookTube viewers want to have the book collection the size of their favourite BookTuber (Ehret et al., 2018), even though they may not read all of the books that they purchase. 

5.4 Conclusion
	The results of the hypotheses show that many expected outcomes proved to be true, namely that watching BookTube videos, the need for information, and the perceived level of credibility of the BookTuber are positively related to book purchasing. In addition, physical books and the YA genre are more popular amongst BookTube viewers compared to people who do not watch BookTube videos. However, both hypotheses concerning sponsored BookTube videos proved not to be true. Thus, older BookTube viewers do not have a higher persuasion knowledge than younger viewers do and the attitude towards sponsored videos is not positively related to book purchasing.
	The exploratory analyses proved that BookTube viewers do read and purchase significantly more books compared to people who do not watch BookTube videos. It thus became clear that reading and owning a lot of books is important to BookTuber viewers and that many BookTube viewers like to purchase books that are often mentioned on BookTube. In addition, since BookTube viewing is also positively related to reading books, it is no surprise that BookTube viewers purchase more books than non-BookTube viewers do, since BookTube viewers have to acquire books first, before they can read them. Finally, it became clear that viewers are less likely to purchase a book that was mentioned in a sponsored video. 

5.5 Societal implications
	The findings of this research are not only important for filling the research gap that has appeared in research about BookTube, but the results are also useful for BookTubers, BookTube viewers, and publishing companies. For example, it became clear that there is positive relationship between watching BookTube videos and buying books, thus both BookTubers and publishing companies can use these results to strengthen their economic successes by adding (affiliate) links to the descriptions of BookTube videos that directly refer the BookTube viewer to a specific website to purchase a book that was mentioned in the video. For BookTubers it is especially important to include these affiliate links in the descriptions of videos that are not sponsored, because viewers are more likely to purchase a book after a BookTuber talks positively about it in a video that is not sponsored, compared to when a video is sponsored. These affiliate links make it easier for the viewer to find the specific book that the BookTuber is talking about and the BookTuber also earns a small commission when viewers buy the book through the affiliate link that links to a specific website. However, BookTube viewers should know that these links are added in the description to encourage the viewer to purchase the books and to spend their money via the affiliate link. 
	In addition, after analysing the results it is important for publishing houses to always consider advertising their newest books by sponsoring BookTubers, since it became clear that there is a relationship between watching BookTube videos and the book buying behaviour of the viewers, as well as the popularity of various books. 
	Finally, since the persuasion knowledge of BookTube viewers does not increase with age, publishing houses should not be afraid to use persuasion techniques in sponsored videos, since both younger and older BookTube viewers will still be influenced by these techniques. However, since it became clear that viewers are less likely to purchase a book that was featured in a sponsored video, is it important to keep these techniques to a minimum in order to ensure a high source credibility. As mentioned, BookTube viewers are more likely to purchase a book that is featured in a video by a BookTuber that is perceived as a credible source of information, thus it is important for both publishing houses and BookTubers to ensure that the video appears as credible as possible.  In addition, if it is the goal of a BookTuber to encourage viewers to purchase a book, it is smarter for them to talk about a book in a normal video instead of in a sponsored video.  

5.6 Limitations 
	This research does have some limitations that need to be addressed. First of all, a methodological limitation of this research is the difference in the sample size of men and women who participated in the survey. In the total survey, only 44 men participated, compared to 1210 women, which is respectively 3.5% and 95.7%. This severely uneven distribution between men and women could have influenced the results of this research. Therefore, future research must pay attention to this uneven distribution. This difference does, however, point to the fact that reading is more popular amongst women, which Ballard (2018) also argued, thus is does not come as a big surprise. However, future research about book buying behaviour and reading habits should try to minimise this difference in the distribution between men and women in order to get a more accurate representation of the book buying behaviour and reading habits for each gender. 
	Secondly, another methodological limitation of this research is that certain scales to measure phenomena were shortened in order to keep the survey at a reasonable length, since long surveys often discourage participants to complete the entire survey (Guin, Baker, Mechling & Rule, 2012). A scale that was substantially shortened was the scale to measure persuasion knowledge, of which only three out of the original nine components were used (Boerman et al., 2018). Each of these components consisted of a variety of items that were used to measure the phenomena. In this research, only one or two items of each component were used in the final survey. Another scale that was shortened was the scale to measure eWOM scepticism, of which only two out of the original nine items were used (Obermiller & Spangenberg, 1998). Even though the scale proved to be reliable, it is recommended to use all the items that were introduced by the researchers. However, for the sake of this research, that was not a feasible solution. 
	Thirdly, a methodological limitation that should be noted is the fact that some items in Likert scales were invented by the researcher, thus no social scientific research was available to defend the choice of these items. Unfortunately, this meant that some of the items were not considered to be a highly reliable scale. Furthermore, some questions in the survey ended up not being used for tests, which means that the survey could have been shortened which would have resulted in a higher completion rate. However, for this research it is not a big problem, since the sample size is large. In addition, since some questions proved to be unnecessary, other more important questions could have been added to the survey. 
      Finally, the social desirability bias is a relevant issue, since many of the participants watch my BookTube videos and may thus be influenced by the social desirability bias, meaning that they could have answered the questions in the survey in such a way that the answers would have been favourable to others. As mentioned, the social desirability bias was avoided as much as possible by providing a clear explanation of the anonymity of the survey. 

5.7 Suggestions for future research and strengths
	The outcomes of this study introduce many possibilities that future research on BookTube can use and build on. First of all, this study focused on how likely BookTube viewers are to buy a book after seeing a (sponsored) BookTube video, however, this question focused solely on the whole video. It will be interesting for future research to also take into the account the number of subscribers, likes, dislikes, and comments that a video receives and whether this influences how likely BookTube viewers are to purchase a book after watching a video, since Jin and Phua (2014) argue that consumers who are exposed to positive eWOM messages from online content creators with a large number of followers are shown to have a higher buying intention. This can be tested by, for example, an experiment in which different groups are exposed to different (sponsored) videos that have a different number of subscribers, likes, dislikes, and comments. This way, a more detailed insight will be given into the reasons why BookTube viewers might be likely to purchase a book after watching a (sponsored) BookTube video. 
      Secondly, future research can focus on the income of the participants, since the amount of money that people are free to spend on books might change the number of books that people purchase on a regular basis. It will be interesting to explore whether people who have a higher income also spend more money on books. 
      A notable strength of this research is the large sample that was gathered, since a total of 1264 participants completed the survey. A large sample size is always a desirable attribute in social scientific research, since it allows the study to be generalised more easily (Matthews & Ross, 2014).





























References

Abrams, D. (2015, April 13). Women buy books, men review them [Blog post]. Retrieved from
 	https://publishingperspectives.com/2015/04/women-buy-books-men-review-them/
Albrecht, K. (2017). Positioning booktube in the publishing world: An examination of online book
reviewing through the field theory (Master's thesis). Retrieved from https://openaccess.leidenuniv.nl/handle/1887/52201
Anderson, K. (2009, June 12). Book buying habits - Evolving and online [Blog post]. Retrieved from
 	https://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2009/06/12/4469/
Angelos, S., & McGriff, N. (2002). Tracking students' reading progress. Knowledge Quest, 30, 44-46.
 	Retrieved from https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ652527 
Atkin, C., & Block, M. (1983). Effectiveness of celebrity endorsers. Journal of Advertising Research,
 	23(1), 57-61. Retrieved from https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1983-24590-001
Ballard, J. (2018, August 14). Women report reading more books than men do [Blog post]. Retrieved
from https://today.yougov.com/topics/lifestyle/articles-reports/2018/08/14/reading-books-men-women
Banou, C. (2017). Re-inventing the book: Challenges from the past for the publishing industry.
 	Cambridge: Candos Publishing
Bansal, H. S., & Voyer, P. A. (2000). Word-of-mouth processes within a services purchase decision
context. Journal of Service Research, 3(2), 166-177. https://doi.org/10.1177/109467050032005
Bearden, W. O., & Etzel, M. J. (1982). Reference group influence on product and brand purchase
 	decisions. Journal of Consumer Research, 9(2), 183-194. https://doi.org/10.1086/208911
Black, H. G., & Kelley, S. W. (2009). A storytelling perspective on online customer reviews reporting
service failure and recovery. Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 26(2), 169-179. https://doi.org/10.1080/10548400902864768
The Benchmarking Company. (2016). TBC's ten-year beauty benchmark: A consumer love
affair with all things beauty. Retrieved from http://benchmarkingcompany.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/PinkReportMakeup-2016-FINAL.pdf 
Boerman, S. C., Willemsen, L. M., & Van Der Aa, E. P. (2017). "This post is sponsored": Effects of
 	sponsorship disclosure on persuasion knowledge and electronic word of mouth in the context
of facebook. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 38, 82-92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intmar.2016.12.002
Boerman, S. C., van Reijmersdal, E. A., Rozendaal, E., & Dima, A. L. (2018). Development of the
persuasion knowledge scales of sponsored content (PKS-SC). International Journal of Advertising, 37(5), 671-697. https://doi.org/10.1080/02650487.2018.1470485

The Book Depository. (2019). About us. Retrieved from
 	https://www.bookdepository.com/help/topic/HelpId/35/About-us#helpContent
Brown, J. J., & Reingen, P. H. (1987). Social ties and word-of mouth referral behavior. Journal of
 	Consumer Research, 14(3), 350-362. https://doi.org/10.1086/209118
Bush, A. J., Smith, R., & Martin, C. (1999). The influence of consumer socialization variables on
attitude toward advertising: A comparison of African-Americans and Caucasians. Journal of Advertising, 28(3), 13-24. https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.1999.10673586
Camargo, A. B., & Chiareto, J. (2016). O booktube e a venda de livros. [Booktube and the sales of
 	books]. Revista Liceu On-Line, 6(1), 130-147. Retrieved from
 	https://liceu.fecap.br/LICEU_ON-LINE/article/view/1739 
Chatterjee, P. (2011). Drivers of new product recommending and referral behaviour on social
network sites. International Journal of Advertising, 30(1), 77-101. https://doi.org/10.2501/IJA-30-1-0077-101
Chavis, D. M., Lee, K. S., & Acosta, J. D. (2008). The sense of community (SCI) revised: The
reliability and validity of the SCI-2. Paper presented at the Second International Community Psychology Conference, Lisboa, Portugal. 
Cheung, C. M. K., Lee, M. K. O., & Thadani, D. R. (2009). The impact of positive electronic word-of-
mouth on consumer online purchasing decision. In Lytras, M. D. et al. (Eds.), Visioning and Engineering the Knowledge Society. A Web Science Perspective (pp. 501-510). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Retrieved from https://books.google.nl
Cho, C. H., Martens, M. L., Kim, H., & Rodrigue, M. (2011). Astroturfing global warming: It isn't
always greener on the other side of the fence. Journal of Business Ethics, 104(4), 571-587. https://doi.org/10/1007/210551-011-0950-6 
Chu, S. C., & Kim, Y. (2011). Determinants of consumer engagement in electronic word-of-mouth
(eWOM) in social networking sites. International Journal of Advertising, 30(1), 47-75. https://doi.org/10.2501/IJA-30-1-047-075
Churchill Jr, G. A., & Moschis, G. P. (1979). Television and interpersonal influences on adolescent
consumer learning. Journal of Consumer Research, 6(1), 23-35. https://doi.org/10.1086/208745
Clark, G., & Phillips, A. (2014). Inside Book Publishing. Routledge.
Constantinides, E., & Fountain, S. J. (2008). Web 2.0: Conceptual foundations and marketing
issues. Journal of Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice, 9(3), 231-244. https://doi.org.10.1057/palgrave.dddmp.4350098
Cox, K. E., & Guthrie, J. T. (2001). Motivational and cognitive contributions to students' amount of
reading. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 26(1), 116-131. https://doi.org/10.1006/CEPS.1999.1044

Daugherty, T., Eastin, M. S., & Bright, L. (2008). Exploring consumer motivations for creating 
user -generated content. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 8(2), 16-25. https://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2008.10722139
Dehghani, M., Niaki, M. K., Ramezani, I., & Sali, R. (2016). Evaluating the influence of YouTube
advertising for attraction of young customers. Computers in Human Behavior, 59, 165-172. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.01.037
Dellarocas, C., Zhang, X., & Awad, N. F. (2007). Exploring the value of online product reviews in
forecasting sales: The case of motion pictures. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 21(4), 23-45. https://doi.org/10.1002/dir/20087
Donthu, N., Cherian, J., & Bhargava, M. (1993). Factors influencing recall of outdoor advertising.
Journal of Advertising Research, 33(3), 64-73. Retrieved from https://go.galegroup.com/ps/anonymous?id=GALE%7CA14316155&sid=googleScholar&v=2.1&it=r&linkaccess=abs&issn=00218499&p=AONE&sw=w
Eastin, M. S., & Daugherty, T. (2005). Past, present, and future trends in mass communication. In
Kimmel, A. (Eds.), Marketing Communication: Emerging Trends and Developments. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ehret, C., Boegel, J., & Manuel‐Nekouei, R. (2018). The role of affect in adolescents' online
literacies: Participatory pressures in booktube culture. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 62(2), 151-161. https://doi.org/10.1002/jaal.881
Engel, J.F., Blackwell, R.D. and Miniard, P.W. (1993), Consumer behavior. New York: Prentice Hall.
Erkan, I., & Evans, C. (2016). The influence of ewom in social media on consumers' purchase
 	intentions: An extended approach to information adoption. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 61, 47-55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.03.003
Etikan, I., Musa, S. A., & Alkassim, R. S. (2016). Comparison of convenience sampling and purposive
sampling. American Journal of Theoretical and Applied Statistics, 5(1), 1-4. 
DOI: 10.11648/j.ajtas.20160501.11
Fan, Y. W., & Miao, Y. F. (2012). Effect of electronic word-of-mouth on consumer purchase
intention: The perspective of gender differences. International Journal of Electronic Business Management, 10(3), 175. Retrieved from http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.688.5221&rep=rep1&type=pdf
Ferraro, R., Bettman, J. R., & Chartrand, T. L. (2008). The power of strangers: The effect of incidental
consumer brand encounters on brand choice. Journal of Consumer Research, 35(5), 729-741. https://doi.org/10.1086/592944
Ford, G. T., Smith, D. B., & Swasy, J. L. (1990). Consumer skepticism of advertising claims: Testing
hypotheses from economics of information. Journal of Consumer Research, 16(4.), 433-441. https://doi.org/10.1086/209228
Forrest, E., & Cao, Y. (2010). Opinions, recommendations and endorsements: the new regulatory
framework for social media. Journal of Business and Policy Research, 5(2), 88-99. Retrieved from http://www.jbprpapers.com/uploads/2010/december/6.pdf
Friestad, M., & Wright, P. (1994). The persuasion knowledge model: How people cope with
persuasion attempts. Journal of Consumer Research, 21(1), 1-31. http://doi.org/10.1086/209380
Gallegos, J. A. (2016, August 23). What is user generated content (and why you should be using it)
 	[Blog post]. Received from https://www.tintup.com/blog/user-generated-content-definition/
Garcés Estrada, W., Avitia Rodríguez, J., & Ramírez Hernández, M. (2018). Rol que
desempeña booktube en la promoción y venta de libros en méxico. [The role that BookTube plays in the promotion and the sales of books in Mexico]. Retrieved from http://ru.iiec.unam.mx/3950/ 
Gray, R., & Howard, V. (2017). Young adult use of eBooks: An analysis of public library services and
resources. Public Library Quarterly, 36(3), 199-212. https://doi.org/10.1080/01616846.2017.1316149
Guin, T. D. L., Baker, R., Mechling, J., & Ruyle, E. (2012). Myths and realities of respondent
engagement in online surveys. International Journal of Market Research, 54(5), 613-633. https://doi.org/10.2501/IJMR-54-5-613-633
Hamilton, R., Vohs, K. D., & McGill, A. L. (2014). We'll be honest, this won't be the best article
 	you'll ever read: The use of dispreferred markers in word-of-mouth communication. Journal of
 	Consumer Research, 41(1), 197-212. https://doi.org/10.1086/675926
Haridakis, P., & Hanson, G. (2009). Social interaction and co-viewing with youtube: Blending mass
communication reception and social connection. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 53(2), 317-335. https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/ 08838150902908270.
Harrison-Walker, L. J. (2001). The measurement of word-of-mouth communication and an
investigation of service quality and customer commitment as potential antecedents. Journal of Service Research, 4(1), 60-75. https://doi.org/10.1177/109467050141006 
Hein, L. (2017). Subverting legacy media: How grassroots intermediaries can amplify book
marketing. Retrieved from https://static1.squarespace.com/static/580a921de58c629604031a71/t/5ad8d18688251b94a8490775/1524158854820/Subverting+Legacy+Media.pdf
Van der Heijden, H. (2004). User acceptance of hedonic information systems. MIS quarterly, 28(4),
 	695-704. DOI: 10.2307/25148660
Hennig-Thurau, T., Gwinner, K. P., Walsh, G., & Gremler, D. D. (2004). Electronic word-of-
      mouth via consumer-opinion platforms: what motivates consumers to articulate
themselves on the internet? Journal of Interactive Marketing, 18(1), 38-52. https://doi.org/10.1002/dir.10073
Hovland, C. I., Janis, I. L., & Kelley, H. H. (1953). Communication and persuasion. New Haven: Yale
 	University Press.
Hovland, C. I., & Weiss, W. (1951). The influence of source credibility on communication
 	effectiveness. Public Opinion Quarterly, 15(4), 635-650. https://doi.org/10.1086/266350
Hsu, C. L., Chuan-Chuan Lin, J., & Chiang, H. S. (2013). The effects of blogger recommendations on 
customers' online shopping intentions. Internet Research, 23(1), 69-88. https://doi.org/10.1108/10662241311295782
Hughes, M. (2017). BookTube and the formation of the young adult canon (Final paper). Retrieved
from https://pdxscholar.library.pdx.edu/eng_bookpubpaper/?utm_source=pdxscholar.
library.pdx.edu%2Feng_bookpubpaper%2F24&utm_medium=PDF&utm_campaign=
PDFCoverPages
James, W. L., & Kover, A. J. (1992). Do overall attitudes toward advertising affect involvement with
specific advertisements? Journal of Advertising Research, 32(5), 78-83. Retrieved from https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1993-11752-001
Jin, S. A. A., & Phua, J. (2014). Following celebrities' tweets about brands: The impact of twitter-
based electronic word-of-mouth on consumers' source credibility perception, buying intention, and social identification with celebrities. Journal of Advertising, 43(2), 181-195. https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2013.827606
Jonas, J. R. (2010). Source credibility of company-produced and user-generated content on the
 	internet: An exploratory study on the filipino youth. Philippine Management Review, 17, 121-
      132. Retrieved from http://cba.upd.edu.ph/undergraduate/docs/source-credibility-on-the-
      internet.pdf
Kaplan, A.M., & Haenlein, M. (2010), Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of
 	social media. Business Horizons, 53(1), 59-68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2009.09.003
Kim, E. E. K., Mattila, A. S., & Baloglu, S. (2011). Effects of fender and expertise on consumers'
motivation to read online hotel reviews. Cornell Hospitality Quarterly, 52(4), 399-406. https://doi.org/10.1177/1938965510394357
King, R. A., Racherla, P., & Bush, V. D. (2014). What we know and don't know about online word-of-
      mouth: A review and synthesis of the literature. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 28(3), 167-
      183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intmar.2014.02.001
Klobas, J. E., McGill, T. J., Moghavvemi, S., & Paramanathan, T. (2018). Compulsive YouTube
usage: A comparison of use motivation and personality effects. Computers in Human Behavior, 87, 129-139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.05.038
Korfiatis, N., Barriocanal-Garcia, E, Sanchez, S. (2012). Evaluating content quality and helpfulness of
online product reviews: The interplay of review helpfulness vs. review content. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 11(3), 205-217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2011.10.003
Kroupová, A. (2018). Booktubering jako součást marketingu na knižním trhu. [Booktubing as part of
the marketing of books] (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from https://theses.cz/id/bn5gsu/64889_kroa00.pdf
Lachance, M. J., Beaudoin, P., & Robitaille, J. (2003). Adolescents' brand sensitivity in apparel:
influence of three socialization agents. International Journal of Consumer Studies, 27(1), 47-57. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1470-6431.2003.00261.x
Lagger, C., Lux, M., & Marques, O. (2012). What makes people watch online videos: An exploratory
study. Computer Entertainment. Retrieved from 	https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Christoph_Lagger/publication/265227595_What_Makes_People_Watch_Online_Videos_An_Exploratory_Study/links/59ddae79aca272b698e9ab5What-Makes-People-Watch-Online-Videos-An-Exploratory-Study.pdf
Lawrence, B., Fournier, S., & Brunel, F. (2013). When companies don't make the ad: A multimethod
 	inquiry into the differential effectiveness of consumer-generated advertising. Journal of
 	Advertising, 41(4), 292- 307. https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2013.795120
Lee, K. (2018). The influence of beauty-related youtube content on consumers' purchase
 	intention. (Master's Thesis). Retrieved from https://trace.tennessee.edu/utk_gradthes/5151/
Lee, M., Rodgers, S., & Kima, M. (2009). Effects of valence and extremity of ewom on attitude
toward the brand and website. Journal of Current Issues & Research in Advertising, 31(2), 1-11. https://doi.org/10.1080/10641734.2009.10404262
Lévy, P. (1997). Education and training: New technologies and collective intelligence. Prospect,
 	27(2), 248-263. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02737169
Li, F., Li, S., & Gu, J. (2019). Whether to delay the release of ebooks or not? an analysis of optimal
publishing strategies for book publishers. Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, 14(2), 124-137. DOI: 10.4067/S0718-18762019000200110
Likert, R. (1932). The likert-type scale. Archives of Psychology, 140(55), 1-55.
Lueg, E. J., & Finney, R. Z. (2007). Interpersonal communication in the consumer socialization
process: Scale development and validation. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 15(1), 25-39. https://doi.org/10.2753/MTP1069-6679150102
Maccoby, E. E. (2007). Historical overview of socialization research and theory. Handbook of
 	socialization: Theory and Research (pp. 13-41). Retrieved from https://book.google.nl
Malbon, J. (2013). Taking fake online consumer reviews seriously. Journal of Consumer
 	Policy, 36(2), 139-157. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10603-012-9216-7
Mangold, W. G., & Faulds, D. J. (2009). Social media: the new hybrid element of the promotion mix.
 	Business Horizons, 54, 3567-365. https://dx.doi.org/10.1010/j.bushor.2009.03.002.
Matthes, J., Schemer, C., & Wirth, W. (2007). More than meets the eye: Investigating the hidden
impact of brand placements in television magazines. International Journal of Advertising, 26(4), 477-503. https://doi.org/10.1080/02650487.2007.11073029
Matthews, B., & Ross, L. (2014). Research methods. Pearson Higher Ed.
McCracken, G. (1989). Who is the celebrity endorser? Cultural foundations of the endorsement
 	process. Journal of Consumer Research, 16(3), 310-321. https://doi.org/10.1086/209217
McCroskey, J. C., Richmond, V. P., & Daly, J. A. (1975). The development of a measure of perceived
homophily in interpersonal communication. Human Communication Research, 1(4), 323-332. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2958.1975.tb00281.x
McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. M. (2001). Birds of a feather: Homophily in social
networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 27(1), 415-444. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.27.1.415
Mehta, A. (2000). Advertising attitudes and advertising effectiveness. Journal of Advertising
 	Research, 40(3), 67-72. DOI: 10.2501/JAR-40-3-67-72
Miller, F. M., & Laczniak, G. R. (2011). The ethics of celebrity-athlete endorsement: What happens
when a star steps out of bounds? Journal of Advertising Research, 51(3), 499-510. DOI: 10.2501/JAR-51-3-499-510
Mishra, A., Maheswarappa, S. S., Maity, M., & Samu, S. (2018). Adolescent's ewom intentions: An
investigation into the roles of peers, the Internet and gender. Journal of Business Research, 86, 394-405. https://doi.org/10.1017/j.jbusres.2017.04.005
Moschis, G. P., & Churchill Jr, G. A. (1978). Consumer socialization: A theoretical and empirical
analysis. Journal of Marketing Research, 15(4), 599-609. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224388701500409
Muijs, D. (2010). Doing quantitative research in education with SPSS. Thousand Oaks, CA:
 	Sage. 
Nakamura, L. (2013). "Words with friends": socially networked reading on goodreads. Pmla, 128(1),
 	238-243. https://doi.org/10.1632/pmla.2013.128.1.238
Nelson, M. (2006). The blog phenomenon and the book publishing industry. Publishing
 	Research Quarterly, 22(2), 3-26. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12109-006-0012-6
Obermiller, C., & Spangenberg, E. R. (1998). Development of a scale to measure consumer skepticism
toward advertising. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 7(2), 159-186. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327663jcp0702_03
OECD, (2003): PISA Programme for International Student Assessment. Retrieved from
http://www.oecd.org/education/school/programmeforinternationalstudentassessmentpisa/33690591.pdf 
O'keefe, D. J. (2002). Persuasion. The International Encyclopedia of Communication. CA: Sage
 	Publications. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781405186407.wbiecp031
O'reilly, T. (2007). What is web 2.0: Design patterns and business models for the next generation of
software. Communications & Strategies, (1), 17. Retrieved from https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1008839
Ohanian, R. (1990). Construction and validation of a scale to measure celebrity endorsers' perceived
expertise, trustworthiness, and attractiveness. Journal of Advertising, 19(3), 39-52. https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.1990.10673191
Ohanian, R. (1991). The impact of celebrity spokespersons' perceived image on consumers' intention
to purchase. Journal of Advertising Research, 31(1), 46-54. Retrieved from https://elibrary.ru/item.asp?id=1589644
Pelixo, A. F. T. (2018). Ewom-based purchase satisfaction: The youtube reality (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from https://run.unl.pt/handle/10362/49743
Perloff, R. M. (2014). Social media effects on young women's body image concerns: Theoretical
perspectives and an agenda for research. Sex Roles, 71(11-12), 363-377. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-014-0384-6
Petty, R. E., & Wegener, D. T. (1998). Matching versus mismatching attitude functions: Implications
for scrutiny of persuasive messages. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24(3), 227-240. https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167298243001
Perkins, K. (2017). The Boundaries of booktube. The Serials Librarian, 73(3-4), 352-356.
	https://doi.org/10.1080/0361526X.2017.1364317
Piaget, J. (1964). Part I: Cognitive development in children: Piaget development and learning. Journal
of Research in Science Teaching, 2(3), 176-186. Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/
Poch, R., & Martin, B. (2015). Effects of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation on user-generated
content. Journal of Strategic Marketing, 23(4), 305-317. https://doi.org/10.1080/0965254X.2014.926966
Prendergast, G., Ko, D., & Yuen, S. Y. (2011). Ewom effect in the consumer purchase decision
making process of a holiday destination: An exploration of young professionals, families and empty nesters in the british market. International Journal of Advertising, 29(5), 687-708. Retrieved from https://marketing.conference-services.net/resources/327/2958/pdf/AM2012_0278_paper.pdf
Purnawirawan, N., De Pelsmacker, P., & Dens, N. (2012). Balance and sequence in online
reviews: How perceived usefulness affects attitudes and intentions. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 26(4), 244-255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intmar.2012.04.002
Rindfleisch, A., & Inman, J. (1998). Explaining the familiarity-liking relationship: mere
 	exposure, information availability, or social desirability? Marketing Letters, 9(1), 5-
      19. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1007958302123
Ruggiero, T. E. (2000). Uses and gratifications theory in the 21st century. Mass Communication &
 	Society, 3(1), 3-37. https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327825MCS0301_02


Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic definitions and new
directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25(1), 54-67. https://doi.org/10.1006/ceps.1999.1020
Sjöblom, M., & Hamari, J. (2017). Why do people watch others play video games? An empirical study
on the motivations of Twitch users. Computers in Human Behavior, 75, 985-996. https://doi.org/10/1016/j.chb.2016.10.019
Smith, D., Menon, S., & Sivakumar, K. (2005). Online peer and editorial recommendations, trust, and
choice in virtual markets. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 19(3), 15-37. https://doi.org/10.1002/dir.20041
Smith, K. (2019, January 4). 46 fascinating and incredibly youtube statistics [Blog post].
 	Retrieved from https://www.brandwatch.com/blog/youtube-stats/ 
Smock, A. D., Ellison, N. B., Lampe, C., & Wohn, D. Y. (2011). Facebook as a toolkit: A uses and
gratification approach to unbundling feature use. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(6), 2322-2329. https://doi.org/10.1016.j.chb.2011.07.011
Spears, N., & Singh, S. N. (2004). Measuring attitude toward the brand and purchase intentions.
Journal of Current Issues & Research in Advertising, 26(2), 53-66. https://doi.org/10.1080/10641734.2004.10505164
Springen, K. (2012, February 20). Are teens embracing ebooks? [Blog post]. Retrieved from
https://www.publishersweekly.com/pw/by-topic/childrens/childrens-industry-news/article/50707-are-teens-embracing-e-books.html
Statista. (2017, March) Statistics and facts about e-books. Statista. Retrieved from
 	https://www.statista.com/topics/1474/e-books/
Statista. (2018). Net revenue of the book publishing industry in the united states from 2009 to 2017.
 	Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/statistics/271931/revenue-of-the-us-book-
      publishing-industry/ 
Sue, V. M., & Ritter, L. A. (2012). Conducting online surveys. Sage.
Suler, J. (2004). The online disinhibition effect. Cyberpsychology & Behavior, 7(3), 321-326.
 	https://doi.org/10.1089/1094931041291295
Sweeney, J. C., Soutar, G. N., & Mazzarol, T. (2008). Factors influencing word of mouth
effectiveness: receiver perspectives. European Journal of Marketing, 42(3/4), 344-364. https://doi.org/10.1108/03090560810852977
Sweney, M. (2014, November 26). Vloggers must clearly tell fans when they're getting paid by
advertisers, asa rules' [Blog post]. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/26/vloggers-must-tell-fans-paid-adverts-asa-rules
Tabachnick, B. G., Fidell, L. S., & Ullman, J. B. (2007). Using multivariate statistics (Vol. 5). Boston,
 	MA: Pearson.
TABS Analytics. (November, 2017). How important is social media in determining which
cosmetics to buy? [Blog post]. Retrieved from https://www.statista.com/statistics/625435/importance-of-social-media-when-purchasing-cosmetics-in-the-us-by-type/ 
Thoumrungroje, A. (2014). The influence of social media intensity and EWOM on conspicuous
consumption. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 148, 7-15. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.07.009
Tutaj, K., & Van Reijmersdal, E. A. (2012). Effects of online advertising format and persuasion
knowledge on audience reactions. Journal of Marketing Communications, 18(1), 5-18. https://doi.org/10.1080/13527266.2011.620765
Varma Citrin, A., Sprott, D. E., Silverman, S. N., & Stem Jr, D. E. (2000). Adoption of internet
shopping: the role of consumer innovativeness. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 100(7), 294-300. https://doi.org.10.1108/02635570010304806
Venkatesh, V. (2000). Determinants of perceived ease of use: Integrating control, intrinsic motivation,
and emotion into the technology acceptance model. Information Systems Research, 11(4), 342-365. https:/doi.org/10.1297/isre.11.4.342.11872
Vermeulen, I. E., & Seegers, D. (2009). Tried and tested: The impact of online hotel reviews on
consumer consideration. Tourism Management, 30(1), 123-127. https://doi.org/10.1016.j.tourman.2008/04/008
De Vreese, C. H., & Neijens, P. (2016) Measuring media exposure in a changing communications
environment. Communication Methods and Measures, 10(2-3), 69-80, DOI: 10.1080/19312458.2016.1150441
Wang, X., Yu, C., & Wei, Y. (2012). Social media peer communication and impacts on purchase
intentions: A consumer socialization framework. Journal of Interactive Marketing, 26(4), 198-208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intmar.2011.11.004
Ward, S. (1974). Consumer socialization. Journal of Consumer Research, 1(2), 1-14. 
	https://doi.org/10.1086/208584
Weitzl, W. (2017). Discussion, implications and future research. In Weitzl, W., Weitzl, W., & Berg.
 	(2017). Measuring Electronic Word-of-Mouth Effectiveness. Springer Gabler.
West, R. L., & Turner, L. H. (2010). Introducing communication theory: Analysis and application.
 	Boston: McGraw-Hill
West, C. (2019). Social media demographics to drive your brand's online presence [Blog post].
 	Retrieved from https://sproutsocial.com/insights/new-social-media-demographics/
Westenberg, W. M. (2016). The influence of YouTubers on teenagers: a descriptive research about the
role YouTubers play in the life of their teenage viewers (Master's thesis). Retrieved from https://essay.utwente.nl/71094/1/Westenberg_MA_BMS.pdf

White, D. W., Goddard, L., & Wilbur, N. (2009). The effects of negative information transference in
the celebrity endorsement relationship. International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, 37(4), 322-335. https://doi.org/10.1108.09590550910948556
Wiener, J. L., & Mowen, J. C. (1986). Source credibility: On the independent effects of trust and
expertise. Advances in Consumer Research, 13, 306-310. Retrieved from http://www.acrwebsite.org/volumes/6509/volumes/v13/NA-13
Williams, J. B., & Jacobs, J. S. (2004). Exploring the use of blogs as learning spaces in the higher
education sector. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 20(2), 232-247. Retrieved from https://eprints.qut.edu.au/13066/
Wojdynski, B. W., & Golan, G. J. (2016). Introduction: Native advertising and the future of mass
communication. American Behavioral Scientist, 60(12), 1403-1407. https://doi.org/10.1177/0002764216660134
Wu, K. (2016). YouTube marketing: Legality of sponsorship and endorsements in advertising. Journal
of Law, Business, and Ethics, 22, 59-91. Retrieved from 	https://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?handle=hein.journals/jourlbun22&div=8&g_sent=1&casa_token=wd0mBLSemCsAAAAA:tBIKdf-c5oH19A-nf3yQzDpPNj1-Nb1BmdyR9xcWFxdfaBB1yfhT5ZdH_yjoeN2bz5jPHA&collection=journals
Zhang, X. J., Ko, M., & Carpenter, D. (2016). Development of a scale to measure skepticism toward
electronic word-of-mouth. Computers in Human Behavior, 56, 198-208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.11.042
Zhu, J. J., & He, Z. (2002). Perceived characteristics, perceived needs, and perceived popularity:
Adoption and use of the Internet in China. Communication Research, 29(4), 466-495. https://doi.org/10.1177/0093650202029004005


















Appendix: Survey

Dear participant,			 			 		

Welcome and thank you for clicking the link to this survey! My name is Britt, I'm 23 years old and I'm a Dutch student in the Media & Creative Industries Master's programme at the Erasmus University of Rotterdam. 
This survey is part of my Master's thesis about BookTube and the book buying behaviour of its viewers. Never heard of BookTube? No worries! You can still fill in this survey. It will take about 5-10 minutes to fill in the survey and you will be asked a few questions about your book buying behaviour and your reading habits. Filling in this survey will help me a lot, so thank you in advance!
Please note that your participation in this survey is completely voluntary and you can quit at any time. The findings of this survey will be used solely for the purpose of my Master's thesis and participating in this survey is completely anonymous, thus, your personal information will be kept strictly confidential.

o I understand the above and wish to continue with the survey

1. With which gender do you identify the most?
o Male
o Female
o Other, 
_______________
o Prefer not to share

2. What is your age?
	_______________

3. In which country do you currently reside?
	(Dropdown menu)






4. What is the highest educational level you have attained?
o None
o Primary school
o Secondary school/high school
o Secondary vocational education (practical education/MBO)
o Bachelor's degree (University degree or degree from University of Applied Science/HBO)
o Master's degree (University degree or degree from University of Applied Science/HBO)
o MBA degree, PhD degree, or other postgraduate training
o Other,
_______________

5. Have you ever heard of the term 'BookTube'?
o Yes
o No

6. Approximately how many BookTube videos have you watched in the past 4 weeks?
o Approximately,
_______________
o I don't want BookTube videos

Questions for BookTube viewers
In the following section, you'll be asked some questions about your BookTube viewing behaviour.

7. Approximately how many BookTubers are you subscribed to?
	_______________

8. Please indicate your motivations for watching BookTube videos.
a. I find BookTube videos enjoyable.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree


b. I find BookTube videos entertaining.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

c. I want to be informed about new books I would otherwise not have found.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

d. I want to find out which books I should read next.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

e. Watching BookTube videos makes me feel less lonely.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree


f. It's important for me to be part of the BookTube community.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

g. Watching BookTube videos helps me to forget about school, work, or other things.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

h. Watching BookTube videos is a habit.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

i. Watching BookTube videos helps me to relax.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree


9. Please indicate how often you watch the following BookTube videos.
a. Book haul
o Never
o Rarely
o Sometimes
o Often
o Very often
o I don't know these videos

b. Book unhaul
o Never
o Rarely
o Sometimes
o Often
o Very often
o I don't know these videos

c. Bookshelf tour
o Never
o Rarely
o Sometimes
o Often
o Very often
o I don't know these videos

d. Reading wrap up
o Never
o Rarely
o Sometimes
o Often
o Very often
o I don't know these videos





e. TBR (to be read)
o Never
o Rarely
o Sometimes
o Often
o Very often
o I don't know these videos

f. Book review
o Never
o Rarely
o Sometimes
o Often
o Very often
o I don't know these videos

g. Book tag
o Never
o Rarely
o Sometimes
o Often
o Very often
o I don't know these videos

h. Reading vlog
o Never
o Rarely
o Sometimes
o Often
o Very often
o I don't know these videos

10. Who is your favourite BookTuber?
_______________


11. Think about the videos of your favourite BookTuber. Please indicate to what extent you agree/disagree with the statements below.
a. I identify myself with the BookTuber.
o Strongly disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Strongly agree

b. The BookTuber shares my interests.
o Strongly disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Strongly agree

c. The BookTuber is honest.
o Strongly disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Strongly agree

d. The BookTuber is dependable.
o Strongly disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Strongly agree

e. The BookTuber is reliable.
o Strongly disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Strongly agree

f. The BookTuber is sincere.
o Strongly disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Strongly agree

f. The BookTuber is trustworthy.
o Strongly disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Strongly agree

g. The BookTuber is an expert.
o Strongly disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Strongly agree

h. The BookTuber is experienced. 
o Strongly disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Strongly agree

i. The BookTuber is knowledgeable. 
o Strongly disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Strongly agree



j. The BookTuber is qualified.
o Strongly disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Strongly agree

k. The BookTuber is skilled.
o Strongly disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Strongly agree

12. If a BookTuber talks positively about a book, how likely are you to buy it?
o Extremely unlikely
o Moderately unlikely
o Slightly unlikely
o Neither unlikely nor likely
o Slightly likely
o Moderately likely
o Extremely likely

13. Have you ever bought a book because of BookTube?
o Yes, if so, please indicate the last book you bought (if you remember)
_______________
o No
o I can't remember

14. Have you ever seen a sponsored video on BookTuber?
o Yes
o No
o I can't remember
o I don't know



Questions about sponsored videos
In the following section, you'll be asked some questions about sponsored videos on BookTube. These are videos in which a book or product is sponsored by a publisher or brand and the BookTuber gets paid to talk about it. 

Please indicate the extent to which you agree with the following statements about sponsored videos on BookTube. 

a. Publishers/brands sponsor videos to encourage people to buy the book/brand.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

b. Publishers/brands sponsor videos to make people think positively about the book/brand.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

c. Publishers/brands try to influence me by placing the book/brand in a context that I like.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree



d. Seeing a book/brand in a sponsored BookTube videos influences me.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

e. I can depend on getting the truth in most sponsored BookTube videos.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

f. I believe sponsored BookTube videos are informative.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

g. The BookTuber should clearly state/say that the video is sponsored.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree


h. The BookTuber should clearly state/say that the opinions are their own.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

i. The BookTuber should not make too many sponsored videos.
o Strongly disagree
o Disagree
o Somewhat disagree
o Neither agree nor disagree
o Somewhat agree
o Agree
o Strongly agree

How likely is it that you will buy a book that was sponsored by the publisher/author and that is featured in a sponsored video?
o Extremely unlikely
o Moderately unlikely
o Slightly unlikely
o Neither unlikely nor likely
o Slightly likely
o Moderately likely
o Extremely likely










Book buying/reading habits - BookTube viewers
In the following section, you'll be asked some questions about your book buying behaviour and reading habits.

How many books have you read in the last 2 months?
	_______________

What genres do you read most? Select up to 3.
* Fantasy
* Science Fiction
* Young Adult
* New Adult
* Adult
* Romance
* Historical Fiction
* Contemporary
* Classics
* Thriller
* Horror
* Middle Grade
* Graphic Novels/Manga
* Nonfiction
* Self Help
* Other,
_______________ 

How many books have you bought in the last 2 months?
	_______________

What book format do you read most often?
o Physical book
o Ebook
o Audiobook




Where do you mostly get your books from? Select up to 2.
* Bookstore
* Secondhand bookstore
* Library
* Online webshop
* Friends & Family
* Other,
_______________

What are other places where you find information about which new books to read/buy? Select up to 3.
* Goodreads
* Blogs
* Instagram
* Twitter
* Facebook
* Newspaper/magazines
* Recommendations from friends & family
* In bookstores
* Other, 
_______________

















Book buying/reading habits - Non-BookTube viewers
In the following section, you'll be asked some questions about your book buying behaviour and reading habits.

How many books have you read in the last 2 months?
	_______________

What genres do you read most? Select up to 3.
* Fantasy
* Science Fiction
* Young Adult
* New Adult
* Adult
* Romance
* Historical Fiction
* Contemporary
* Classics
* Thriller
* Horror
* Middle Grade
* Graphic Novels/Manga
* Nonfiction
* Self Help
* Other,
_______________ 

How many books have you bought in the last 2 months?
	_______________

What book format do you read most often?
o Physical book
o Ebook
o Audiobook




Where do you mostly get your books from? Select up to 2.
* Bookstore
* Secondhand bookstore
* Library
* Online webshop
* Friends & Family
* Other,
_______________

What are other places where you find information about which new books to read/buy? Select up to 3.
* YouTube
* Goodreads
* Blogs
* Instagram
* Twitter
* Facebook
* Newspaper/magazines
* Recommendations from friends & family
* In bookstores
* Other, 
_______________

End question
How did you encounter this survey?
o YouTube
o Twitter
o Instagram
o Facebook
o Book Forum
o Other, 
_______________

Thank you very much for participating in this survey. 










Polarization and selective media exposure: a look into the online news outlets consumption habits of Catalans during the Catalan Referendum





	

Student Name:	Andrea A. Castarlenas Recoder
Student Number:	507704

Supervisor: 		Dr. João Ferreira Goncalves


Master Media Studies - Media, Culture & Society
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication
Erasmus University Rotterdam


Master's Thesis 
June 2019





Polarization and selective media exposure: a look into the online news outlets consumption habits of Catalans during the Catalan Referendum


8 ABSTRACT

On October 1st, 2017 the autonomous government of Catalonia decided to set a unilateral self-determination referendum with the continuous opposition of the Spanish government. This political conflict was extensively covered by all the Spanish media and attracted worldwide attention through the coverage of international media institutions in many different countries. This thesis aims to explore the online media consumption habits of Catalan citizens during that period by focusing on to what extent selective media exposure relate to polarized attitudes. Adopting a quantitative approach, it was distributed a cross-sectional online survey through different Facebook and WhatsApp groups, of different political leanings that helped for the configuration of a non-random sample of 237 Catalans. The results of this research show that there is a relationship between having a higher polarized attitude and having a higher level of selective media exposure to political concordant online media. The nature of this relationship demonstrates that individuals with a higher polarized attitude are trusting more the media organizations following like-minded political stance while they show untrustworthiness towards politically dissimilar media organizations. Moreover, according to the research results, the stance of pro-independence supporters displayed a higher selective media exposure towards Catalan-based online news outlets than pro-unitarism supporters towards Spanish-based online news outlets. This entailed that pro-independence supporters showed a higher level of trust in Catalan-based online media than pro-unitarism supporters towards Spanish-based online media. However, the polarization of attitudes did not create animosity between individuals of different political stances since it was not found a significant level of affective polarization towards out-group individuals. In the case of affective polarization to contrary political elites there was a relation between having an unfavorable opinion towards pro-referendum or against-referendum politicians and being a pro-unitarism or pro-independence supporter. Overall, is relevant to highlight the toleration towards discrepant opinions among the Catalan society but continuing studying these media phenomena before it becomes a bigger issue for democratic politics. 

KEYWORDS: Polarization, Selective media exposure, Catalan Referendum, Online news outlets, Spanish media





ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Agraeixo immensament la col·laboració de totes aquelles persones anònimes que van participar voluntàriament en l'enquesta, així com especialment al meu supervisor João per les intenses i dures hores de treball posades en aquesta tesi i a la meva família i amics pel suport incondicional durant tot el procés. Per últim, m'agradaria dedicar aquest treball a totes aquelles persones que han lluitat i continuen lluitant per preservar el tractat de la Declaració Universal dels Drets Humans.


















9 Table of Contents

Acknowledgments
1. Introduction	1
2. Theory and previous research	5
2.1 Characteristics of the Catalan media system	5
2.2 Polarization of attitudes and partisan leaning in media	7
2.3 Partisan selective media exposure	11
2.4 Hostile media effect	15
2.5 Affective polarization	18
2.6 Summary	20
3. Methodology	22
3.1 Choice of method	22
3.2 Sampling population	23
3.3 Survey design	26
3.4 Operationalization	29
3.4.1 Operationalization of exploratory variables	32
3.4.2 Control Variables	34
3.5 Analysis	35
3.6 Validity and reliability	36
3.6.1 Validity	37
3.6.2. Reliability	38
4. Results	41
4.1 Descriptive Statistics	41
4.1.1 Dependent variables	41
4.1.2 Independent variable	43
4.1.3 Exploratory variables	43
4.1.4 Control Variables	44
4.2 Hypotheses Tests	45
4.3 Control variables tests	56
4.3.1 Language	56
4.3.2 Political party	58
4.3.3 Age	60
4.3.4 Gender	60
4.4 Discussion	60
5. Conclusion	62
5.1 Conclusion and implications of the research	62
5.2 Limitations of the research	64
5.3 Future research	65
References	67
Appendix A..............................................................................................................................................73
Appendix B..............................................................................................................................................78























List of Tables 
Table 1. Factor analysis and reliability for scale trust upon news outlets 	39
Table 2. Frequencies of the overall Perception of online news outlets discourse 	41
Table 3. Frequencies of Perception of online news outlets per item 	41
Table 4. Descriptive statistics of Trust upon online news outlets per item 	44
Table 5. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Perception of La Vanguardia discourse 	47
Table 6. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Identification of the headline El País	49
Table 7. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Perception of El País discourse 	50
Table 8. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Affective polarization towards out-group individuals 	53
Table 9. Crosstabulation of Readership of online news outlets based on their provenience and Affective polarization towards out-group individuals	55
Table 10. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Language	56
Table 11. Crosstabulation of Types of relationship with Spain and Language	57
Table 12. Crosstabulation of Readers of online news outlets based on their provenience and Language	58
Table 13. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Political party 	58
Table 14. Crosstabulation of Readership of online news outlets based on their provenience and Political party 	59

Table 1B. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Perception online news outlets discourse..................................................................................................................................................78



















10 1. Introduction 
This research will explore the phenomena of polarization and selective media exposure using as a case study the Catalan referendum of 2017. The Spanish strongly partisan media tradition, as well as the substantial political event that the referendum turned out to be, with heavy ideological charges, might have produced a unique media landscape that the author considered relevant for media scholars to analyze and research, using a quantitative approach.
      The claim of Catalan people to self-determination is not something that arose sporadically in recent years. The first time that Catalonia demanded the right to self-determination was after the elections of April 1931, where the Republican party 'Esquerra Republicana' emerged as the irrefutable winner of those elections (Medrano, 1994). After that, the Second Republic was established in Spain and it brought to the approval of a Statute of Autonomy for Catalonia in 1932 that conceded some economical, juridical and cultural improves as well as more power of decision to the Catalan region. 
      As history shows, the Second Republic collapse with the mutiny of the Spanish army leaded by Francisco Franco and with the support of fascist European leaders, that turned into a civil war among two differentiate blocs: 'Republicanos' (defenders of a federalist multicultural political project) and 'Franquistas' (supporters of a Spain with only one cultural identity). The civil war lasted 3 years (1936-1939) and was followed by a thirty-six-year Dictatorship that suppressed and prohibited any traces of Catalan language, culture and republican ideology. Democracy was reestablished after Franco's death in 1978. The Constitution of 1978 even if it was progressive by its time and circumstances, it was made under a lot of pressure and caution to not reanimate remaining fascists leaders and forces thus it was written in behalf to " laid the basis for a degree of cooperation and toleration between the Catalan autonomist project and the Spanish centralized project" (Miller & Miller, 1996, p.116), which it meant the inclusion of decrees vaguely written and open to one's interpretation. This is one of the main juridical problematics that the country is facing nowadays and in what the conflict of the Catalan referendum is mainly based on due to it is not implicit in the Constitution that a region cannot organize a self-determination referendum, it relies on the constitutional interpretation of a judge, court or state (Levrat, Antunes, Tusseau & Williams, 2017). The Catalan government had been trying since 2003 to acquire more institutional power through a series of political procedures that were never granted by the Spanish government, in order to gain more autonomy to legislate in education, economy or matters of social services. The continuous negative of the central government increased the number of Catalans that started to support pro-independence parties, that finally won with a majority of votes the elections to the 'Generalitat de Catalunya' in 2015. Once the pro-independence parties formed the new government, they decided to organize a referendum of self-determination - as it was the main promise of the electoral campaigns of these parties - the 1st of October of 2017, where all the Catalan citizens would be called to vote, whether they wanted Catalonia to become an independent state in form of Republic or not. 
      Once the date of the referendum was set, the Catalan government started to make juridical and administrative arrangements in order to grant that the 1st of October all the Catalans citizens could vote normally. In parallel, the Spanish government kept assuring that the referendum would never take place and that extraordinary measurements will be taken to prevent this to happen. Consequently, thousands of police officers were sent to Catalonia to guarantee that the court order from the Constitutional, banning the referendum, was going to be followed by Catalan authorities and citizens (ABC, 2017). Many Catalans got mobilized after the arrival of the police to the region with volunteers spending the night in the school ballots in order to block the entrance of the police authorities and to assure that the schools could open the 1st of October. Because of the exceptional characteristics of the political event, an extensive media coverage was displaced during that day, with hundreds of authorized media journalists from all over the world to document what would happen minute by minute in the school ballots and in the Catalan and Spanish governments. Therefore, the different national and international media covering the referendum, become crucial actors since they end up being the guarantors of explaining to the world what happened that day, depicting whether the referendum could be legitimize or not and if there was excessive violence from the policies authorities or from the citizens. Furthermore, even if some citizens experienced the referendum firsthand, it was a very followed event in the media, in where people may had chosen partisan news outlets to gather information thus creating different beliefs and perceptions among the Catalan citizenship of what happened that day. 
      Several media scholars have already examined the relationship between media and politics, which is crucial for the process of constructing narratives, spreading messages to a mass audience and framing and shaping opinions, ideologies and events (Weber & Koehler, 2017). This research will focus specifically on the partisan selective exposure and polarization in the daily media consumption that, such a mediatized political event like the referendum, entangled in the Catalan society. Thereby, this thesis aims to fulfil answer the next question:
      RQ: To what extent does selective media exposure relate to polarized attitudes in Catalan society regarding the Catalan referendum? 
      The social relevance of this topic comes precisely with the impact that had over the Spanish political and democratic structure, the public debate opened after its celebration and the measures taken by the Spanish government and the courts over the elective Catalan politicians, 9 being imprisoned and 7 managing to exile to other European countries (among them the former President of 'la Generalitat' Carles Puigdememont). The referendum concern is so remarkable that keeps eclipsing the agenda of the news outlets, not only in Spain but as well in Europe, every time the case advances. It was also possible to notice how polarization increased among citizens during that period, with people demonstrating against the political actions that the Spanish government was taken, and in the other stance by organizing marches for the unity of Spain, cheering the decisions of the Spanish government. Polarization was also present in the media being visible in the way that the news outlets framed the events related to the referendum, by either describing it as an unconstitutional rebellion or as a democratic and peaceful movement of civilian disobedience. This thesis wants to research if the Catalan society was polarized and the choices of online news outlets made by the Catalans citizens were subject to a partisan selective exposure to likeminded media, dismissing other points of view or balanced media, that could go against one's beliefs.
      The scientific relevance of the research comes with the lack of literature around the media context that surrounded the referendum and the days after its celebration, in which different media sources were giving large coverages, monopolizing all the mediatic space of the Spanish media with the last-minute information and developed events. Therefore, the Spanish society was highly exposed to this political event, by either consuming it in the media or encounter it in their daily life activities, in form of discussions or debates with others, being difficult not to develop a clear and strong opinion about it. The research will contribute filling the gap that exists in scientific literature due to its a relatively new political conflict that other scholars have not yet analyzed using media theories and concepts, adding also, new literature to the concepts of polarization and selective media exposure. These media phenomena have been extensively studied in a United States political context by many authors (Stroud, 2010; Faris, Roberts, Etling, Bourassa, Zuckerman & Benkler, 2017; Prior, 2013) that focused primarily on polarization and selective exposure of citizens during election periods. It is possible to see a lack of literature when it comes to polarization and selective exposure of citizens during a political event such as a referendum of self-determination. It would be simplistic to expected that citizens behave the same way when facing ordinary elections in a country than in a referendum, thus the need to research it separately and in a broaden way. 
      Accordingly, the research question surrounds the Catalan referendum of the 1st of October 2017 and will be linked to prior media studies, in order to examine which sources of online news outlets were used by the Catalan population during that day and the subsequent days, on the follow-up political events. Hence, the research will look at the relationship between the online news outlets choose by the Catalan citizens to gather information and opinions and one's political position upon the celebration of an independence referendum for Catalonia. 
      The thesis was divided in three main sections. A first chapter of discussion of previous studies regarding the concepts of polarization and selective exposure as well as a contextualization of the Spanish media landscape and its particularities. A second section describing the methodology and steps followed to conduct the research and a results chapter in where the findings will be presented, and the hypotheses will be accepted or rejected. In the final conclusion chapter, it will be given and overall discussion of the findings answering the research question and it will be explained the limitations of the research and future lines of investigation. 













11 2. Theory and previous research 
This chapter will analyze and review the concepts and studies of other political-media scholars that will set the theoretical ground of the present research and provide a reasonable argumentation for the hypotheses. The concepts presented in this chapter will mainly focus on the potential media influence of increasing polarization and affective polarization attitudes among Catalan individuals during the period of the self-determination referendum of 2017. Possible causes for polarization will be explored, such as selective media exposure to like-minded partisan outlets and the hostile media effect towards neutral information.  
      11.1 2.1 Characteristics of the Catalan media system
      As a starting point, it is relevant to evaluate the Catalan media landscape that is composed by both Spanish and Catalan media (from public and private broadcasters) and its singularities when it comes to news outlets and editorial lines behind the media conglomerates. 
      As Hallin and Mancini (2004) argue, the press in Southern Europe if compared to the Northern European countries, has historically had a lower amount of readers, commercial profits and press circulation, and entangles a situation where the press must be often subsidized by political actors. This situation has generated discussions around the ethical implications of the media in these countries, especially when it comes to their "degree of political parallelism and of journalistic professionalism" (Hallin & Mancini, 2004, p.22). The media history of the Mediterranean region, which is marked by several political conflicts, can explain the strong tradition that exists in those countries where media systems are thought of as means of ideological expression and political mobilization, contrasting with the characteristics of western or northern media systems (Papathanassopoulos, 2007). One may argue that the media landscape could have changed and that the Spanish media system could have been modernized since Hallin and Mancini wrote their renowned and popular academia article in 2004. To assess this claim, the authors offered an updating version of their three media models 12 years later. However, the Spanish media system is still portrayed with the same high level of political parallelism from twelve years ago, thus remaining in the classification of being a 'polarized pluralistic' media model characterized by low newspaper circulation, weaker journalistic professionalism and high levels of state intervention in the form of press subsidies (Hallin & Mancini, 2016). 
      Analyzing more in-depth the aforementioned characteristics that make countries media model considered as a 'polarized pluralistic' system, the concept of political parallelism describes the extent to which media content reflects distinct political orientations in news coverages and the existence of organizational connections between media and political parties. Media in Spain is considered to be instrumentalized by political actors and elites since "it is increasingly dominated, not by industrialists with their primary interests outside the media but, by two broad multimedia conglomerates which, however, do have strong political alliances (Prisa with the socialist party PSOE and Telefónica with the conservative party PP)" (Papathanassopoulos, 2007, p.194). Political parallelism can also be manifested through the "partisanship of media audiences", with readers/viewers consuming different types of media depending on their political affiliations (Hallin & Mancini, 2004, p.22). Another important characteristic to be considered a polarized pluralistic media model is the low mass circulation of newspapers (in the case of Spain) and the fact that in those societies' citizens tend to rely more on online outlets and television as sources of political information than in the printed-press. This approach also applies to the Catalan media landscape, since the last barometer made in November 2018 by the Catalan Institute of Opinion showed that television and Internet are the most accessed types of media in Catalonia by citizens that seek politically related news (Centre d'Estudis d'Opinió, 2018, p.65). Reinforcing this line of argumentation, Spain "has one of the most diverse homegrown, digital-born sectors in Europe" (Newman, Fletcher, Kalogeropoulos, Levy & Kleis Nielsen, 2018, p.102). Two-thirds of the Spanish population access news daily through online sources (Newman et al., 2018). However, the most consulted online websites for political news related are paradoxically online versions of printed newspapers (e.g. El País, La Vanguardia, El Mundo, Ara) or television websites (TV3, Telecinco) (Centre d'Estudis d'Opinió, 2018, p.68). It is also important to consider exclusively online press sites such as El Diario, Vilaweb, Ara and Nacional, which are among the top 10 most visited sites for political online news outlets by Catalan citizens (Centre d'Estudis d'Opinió, 2018, p.68). The terms online news outlets and online media will be used in this thesis to refer to both online versions of other media as well as exclusively online sites. 
      The Catalan media landscape is composed by Catalan and Spanish public media as well as private media conglomerates, but both types of media present clear signs of political parallelism and interventionism from the state. The governing board of the public media in Spain and Catalonia used to be chosen by the government in power, evincing organizational connections between the public media and political parties. RTVE (the Spanish public broadcaster) and CCMA (the Catalan public broadcaster) were both regularly criticized for pro-governmental bias in its news coverage and a lack of balance in its use of sources and commentators, which brought about a change in the law in September 2018, that established open and public competition and the need for a two-thirds (rather than simple) majority in Parliament for appointing its governing board and presidency (Newman et al., 2018). Even with this change in the law of public competition, it could still be argued that political parallelism and pro-governmental bias exists in the public media in Spain and Catalonia, due to ruling parties are still electing the governing board of the public media conglomerates by creating alliances with related parties to get the two-thirds necessary. On the other hand, the Spanish and Catalan private media conglomerates also highly rely on public subsidies via indirect contributions that are made by buying advertisement spots as 'institutional publicity' (Generalitat de Catalunya, 2011), which makes certain media greatly subject to political parties in order to gain public monetary revenues. This situation does not significantly apply to Tv channels due to their earnings are safer with multiple advertisers, rather it is the traditional press who is the most affected, due to facing a major crisis in the print-business model. Traditional press revenues are falling as a result of the downturn of advertisements and the decline in readership, which is throwing the newspapers to adopt a digital strategy in order to survive and make more profits (Prado, 2014). This crisis made the main press names in Spain highly dependent on such mentioned public subsidies of governments in order to secure their continuity and their strategic business model, which can bring about the question of whether or not editorial freedom has been compromised to obtain these monetary revenues. The outcome of all these aspects and singularities of the Spanish media structure is that half of the citizens do not trust media outlets and their neutrality thus being associated with certain ideological tendencies weakening journalists' professionalism and work (Newman et al., 2018). The possible mistrust of the Spanish society towards news outlets because of their connections with the respective Catalan and Spanish governments, makes this thesis research focus on investigating at a deeper level, the citizen's consumption patterns of online media when it comes to political news events, taking as a case of study the referendum of the 1st of October of 2017 drive by the Catalan government. This research will analyze if the patterns of online media consumption vary in function of one's political view toward the aforementioned referendum, focusing not only in the concept of political parallelism already discussed, but also in the media effects of polarization and partisan selective exposure that will be discussed in the following sections. 
      11.2 2.2 Polarization of attitudes and partisan leaning in media
      Since a framework has already been given to better understand and conceptualize the media landscape in Catalonia and Spain, the author will move forward to argue whether the Catalan media can be considered polarized and taking partisan discourses when reporting political news as well as possibly polarizing readers attitudes. Polarization can be a complex phenomenon involving a range of dynamics that play out differently in different contexts. In this case, this paper will pay more attention to the polarization of mass audience rather than of elites, focusing on the concept of polarization as the state where people's attitudes have diverged to ideological extremes (DiMaggio, Evans & Bryson, 1996). Attitudinal polarization in citizens can imply that these move to the poles and harden their beliefs, becoming more challenging to find consensus solutions in a society where compromise becomes more difficult and elusive (Levendunsky, 2013). 
       As scholars have already discussed in the past (Hallin & Mancini, 2004; Newman et al., 2018), because of the intrinsic characteristics of the Spanish media system, it has always been recognized some sort of partisan coverage within the Spanish and Catalan media in politically related news. Simultaneously, the development of cable television and the explosion of media outlets on the Internet have created a more fragmented information environment in which cable news, talk radio, and 24-hour news outlets compete for attention. Given this dramatic increase in the number of available news outlets, it is not surprising that media choices increasingly reflect partisan considerations, thus individuals are able to seek out and find news outlets that enhance their consistent beliefs (Iyengar & Hahn, 2009). Baumgartner and Chaqués (2015) conduct a quantitative content data analysis research upon those that are considered the two leading, most-rigorous and distinguished newspapers of Spain, El Mundo and El País. The results revealed biases on political news especially when it came to cover the rival party of each newspaper. The findings exposed that El Mundo (considered as a conservative newspaper) tend to always be more critical with the political performance of the left-wing party 'PSOE' and El País (considered as a liberal newspaper) with its corresponding political opponent, the right-wing party 'PP'. The results of the research of Baumgartner and Chaqués (2015) show the existence of "partisan differences in news coverages, downplaying the actions of allies and focusing on heaping bad news of rivals" (p.269). 
      Nevertheless, is not possible to consider the prior traditional partisan news coverages with the Catalan independence conflict, it has to be studied as a particular and extraordinary case because it has altered the traditional press editorial lines when reporting outlets related to the referendum. It can be argued that the differences in the performance of partisan coverages in referendums news outlets do not reside anymore in the traditional dichotomy of having a more liberal press or conservative press approach, rather it is about either having pro-independence discourses or pro-unitarism discourses in most of the news outlets relating Catalan politics. In other words, if El Mundo and El País were typically characterized as having different political coverages depending if the main left or wing party was involved, now both are considered to have the same editorial line when it comes to the news coverages of Catalan politics. This can be explained by the fact that PSOE and PP hold almost the same posture upon the referendum of independence, being both against it, although in different intensities. This entailed that pro-unitarism discourses are being related and spread by the four Madrid-based newspapers (El País, El Mundo, La Razón and ABC) and the two respective main titles in Catalonia (La Vanguardia and El Periodico), all of them "joining the main Spanish political parties in defending the legal status quo" (Newman et al., 2018, p.102). This involved that the considered 'rigorous and leading press' of Spain and Catalonia for the mass audience, are now found to have similar coverages and editorial lines with, for example, typically partisan right-wing press such as La Razón and ABC (Baumgartner & Chaqués, 2015). This situation has raised questions of lack of balance or contrasted coverages among the traditional press and main conglomerates when talking about the Catalan independence topic that could have lead to polarized attitudes among citizens. It could be discussed whether the Spanish media landscape is becoming less plural when the main media conglomerates follow predominantly the Spanish political parties discourses against the referendum and its celebration. With this landscape, the discourse of pro-independence regional parties that happen to be a minority in the Spanish Parliament, have fewer media coverage at the national level, obviating this way the 'rival' political actors discourses of the conflict. 
      If we look at the Catalan regional level, the pro-independence parties have the majority of representatives in the Catalan Parliament, and is possible to find media spreading more pro-independence discourses, such as TV3, the Tv channel with higher audience in the region and the online news portal 324 that is one of the most visited for political news outlets (Centre d'Estudis & d'Opinió, 2018), both belonging to the public Catalan media conglomerate 'Corporació catalana de mitjans audiovisuals' (CCMA). Both mediums have been questioned for focusing overly on pro-independence discourses or approaches on its news outlets and with some programs, neglecting pro-unitarism discourses (Newman et al., 2018). Concurrently the pro-independence discourse has been openly discussed by different exclusively partisan online press sites, such as Ara, Vilaweb, Nacional or Nació Digital that happen to be some of the most-read online news outlets by the Catalan citizens when searching for political news (Centre d'Estudis d'Opinió, 2018, p.68). Even if it would be possible to argue that the Catalan media is more monopolized by pro-independence discourses, it is important to remark that Catalan citizens have access to the Madrid's discourses but not the other way around. Is possible to find Catalan media names like the beforementioned leading newspapers La Vanguardia and El Periódico with predominantly more Spanish parties' discourses. It is important to remark that all the media discussed above mentioned only reports in the Catalan language and even if they are available online to a Spanish audience, it is not really possible to be read by a non-Catalan speaking citizen. This aspect is especially important because it can imply that there might be two different realities portrayed among the Catalan-based and Madrid-based media. Catalan speakers are also native in the Spanish language, because of the dual-mandatory educational system in Catalonia, but a Spanish citizen does not speak Catalan natively. Since the research is only focusing on Catalan citizens online media consumption patterns, this aspect will not affect the plurality of online sources that can be used and accessed by the Catalans due to the fact that anyone in Catalonia is capable in reading either Spanish and Catalan written news outlets, but it is not the same the other way around. The author considered that it was important to mention this aspect to better understand the singularities of the political conflict when it comes to media coverage and why the Spanish society is sometimes portrayed in the media as highly 'polarized' and even by some people 'indoctrinated' depending if you are Catalan or Spanish (Gil, 2017).
      Therefore, it would be possible to argue that the Spanish and Catalan media landscape has become strongly polarized and mostly taken a partisan approach, depending on the nature and scope of the online media, and around the divisive issue of the Catalan referendum, which might have led individuals to take polarized attitudes. However, it is important to not fall into too deterministic lines of argument. The relationship between media and politics is undeniable, with several scholars highlighting that they become crucial during the process of constructing narratives, spreading messages to a mass audience and framing and shaping opinions, ideologies and events (Weber & Koehler, 2017). However, media and journalists, also translate the reality of the politic spheres and the political climate in their news reports. Continuing with this line of argumentation, Prior (2013) states that the rise of polarization in the media can be the result of previous polarized discourses among the political elites in a heated political climate. In the case of Catalonia, it was possible to acknowledge how pro-independence politicians' and pro-unitarism politicians' discourses scaled its intensity in 2015, when the determination to carry out a referendum of independence by the Catalan government was becoming plausible due to the pro-independence parties, achieved for the first time, the majority in the Catalan Parliament (BBC Mundo, 2015). After that time, the political stances became more polarized, being especially reflected on the types of accusations and threats that both sides of politicians would throw to each other (BBC Mundo, 2015). This heated polarized climate got portrayed by and translated into the media, with the polarization and more radical partisanship of news outlets when reporting about Catalan political news. 
      Previous scholars' arguments and findings present a polarized media system in Catalonia with strong organizational connections among governmental actors and the existence of partisan media coverages, where the treatment of political affairs differs with each news outlet's political position and government-backing. Prior (2013) found evidence in his research "concerning the causal impact of a more partisan media environment on mass polarization" (p.102). This was also researched by Levendunsky and Maholtra (2015) in the United States political context, where they were able to find a connection between citizens reading news about polarized politics and thinking that the mass public is therefore more polarized. They conducted a study where North-American news outlets of different time periods were analyzed using a quantitative content data analysis method, searching for the usage of the word 'polarization' in political-related news. They found that the word had become extremely present in the media after 2008 and that the increased usage of the word in news articles may have affected the general public's notions of living in a polarized North-American society. As it was discussed, the Spanish political elites increased their tone when talking about the possible independence of Catalonia and the referendums celebration, a fact that was portrayed by the media and that readers might interpret to happen also in the societal/citizenship level. Accordingly, it is difficult to point out to a single reason that might enable polarization in a society. Is it cause of politicians, media discourses and/or the self-interpretation of citizens that the society is polarized? This research will not focus on finding the underlying polarization effect in a society, but rather in investigating through the online media consumption patterns of Catalans, which types of online news outlets were read during the days of the referendum and if it is possible to establish connections between reading certain news outlets and having a stronger/more polarized attitude towards the political conflict. Further, polarized attitudes will also be contemplated using the affective polarization phenomenon, which will be explained and discussed in a separate later section. 
      11.3 2.3 Partisan selective media exposure 
      Following the theorization of Hallin and Mancini (2004) in where they portrayed the Spanish and Catalan media as having political parallelism with political elites, as well of the line of argumentation of the possible polarization of media and individuals in Catalonia is important to now focus on studying another media effect especially related to the beforementioned effects and mainly studied and researched by Stroud (2010) in political communication science, the selective media exposure of individuals. This concept narrows down the possible media effects of polarization, through engaging it more with the perspective of the citizen's news outlet choices and their habits of media consumption. It is not possible to talk about the effects of polarization without taking into account selective exposure. Partisan selective exposure can be defined as the predisposition of reading and seeking for news outlets that reinforce and agree with one's self-preconceived political beliefs or opinions (Stroud, 2010). All other things being equal, this phenomenon entails that people are more likely to consume (news) content that is aligned with their interests and/or political views. Several scholars have shown that selective exposure develops in individuals because of assorted reasonings. An individual may want to defend and reinforce their political position because they have a commitment with a certain belief (Schwarz, Frey, & Kumpf, 1980 as cited in Kastenmüller, Greitemeyer, Jonas, Fischer & Frey, 2010), they want to defend their own world view (Jonas, Greenberg & Frey, 2003 as cited in Kastenmüller et al, 2010), they want to reduce cognitive dissonance; that is the undesirable feeling that can arise when one has contradictory cognitions (Festinger, 1957) or they want to maintain a positive self‐image as 'good deciders' (Frey, 1986; Kunda, 1990 as cited in Kastenmüller et al, 2010). These are some of the explanations that authors argue can lead to an individual to purposely expose themselves to congenial messages in tune with their political beliefs, but there is still not enough evidence that proves which one best accounts for its occurrence. The best answer that we have so far is that "several of these mechanisms may operate in concert or different explanations may account for selective exposure in different circumstances" (Stroud, 2018, p.3). 
      Selective exposure can also occur in different forms. Stroud (2018) in the Oxford Handbook of Political Communication compiles four different types: the selection of (1) news or entertainment, (2) messages about different issues, (3) a certain medium (e.g., the Internet), and (4) like-minded messages. This thesis will be exploring mainly the last type of selective exposure, the like-minded messages, due to its aim to research selective exposure regarding a mass-media covered political event that dominated the media agenda of all types of media for consecutive days before and after the referendum celebration. The third type of selective exposure, even if it distinguishes between the Internet and more mainstream outlets, will not be taken into account due to its emphasis on the selection of the medium but not regarding the content itself, which is not what this thesis aims to research. Consequently, selective exposure will be studied as "the degree to which citizens choose like-minded political information" (Stroud, 2018, p.5) acknowledging that news outlets can have a partisan tendency.
      Furthermore, is also relevant to discuss and consider which democratic consequences can entail the partisan selective exposure of citizens in society. Stroud (2011) acknowledges three different ones: 
      1) It can energize participation in politics and civic engagement with them, making citizens more aware of their government's actions. Partisan media can call for civilian mobilization and provide information about a political event but, on the other side, they may not provide equitable participation, energizing overrepresented groups. For example, wealthy and educated people tend to consume more political related news than other demographics. 
      2) It may affect what citizens know about politics. Citizens should reach informed political decisions after carefully weighing arguments, but this is not always the case and partisan selective exposure can negatively contribute to making biased and unbalanced decisions. This can lead an individual to reject oppositional arguments even if they may have logical arguments and contrasted sources. 
      3) May influence citizens' political attitudes and beliefs. Citizens using likeminded media may develop more polarized political attitudes and more fragmented political interests. The legitimacy of public figures not sharing a certain political perspective might be even put into question. 
      Overall, the partisan selective exposure behavior "has the potential to affect how citizens reason about, react to, and act in the political world" (Stroud, 2011, p.10), that is why is important to study it in relation with democratic politics. Relating this to the Catalan conflict, the 1st of October referendum only mobilized those who were supporters of the Catalan independence due to those supporting pro-unitarism views did not legitimize such referendum and did not go to vote (Pi, 2017). Hence, the results of the referendum turned to be homogenous: the 90.18% of the people who went voting said yes to Catalonia becoming an independent republican state but if we look at the participation levels, only the 43.03% of the electorate participated (Pi, 2017). This can be one of the signals indicating that indeed a partisan selective exposure was being displayed if we only focus on the citizen's mobilization conducts but, this is not a reliable measurement or evidence enough to make such a statement. Accordingly, this research will try to investigate consequences 2 and 3 mentioned by Stroud (2011), in order to be able to confirm if it is possible to talk about partisan selective exposure of the Catalan citizens before, during and after the referendum celebration. 
      Selective exposure is based on the logic that if people are mainly exposed to news outlets that do not challenge their beliefs, it will be difficult to dispute these assumptions in the future, leaving little space for moderate beliefs and the construction of well-informed citizens (Stroud, 2010). This can be a threat to democratic politics and structures due to if citizens are exposed to a high partisan media coverage, they can become easier to manipulate with fake news or biased discourses because the information will not be contrasted later on with other media sources. This is crucial, especially in those countries where the media landscape is proved to have political parallelism with the ruling government and main political parties, as the Spanish media conglomerates are. A good example to illustrate this phenomenon is the case of the last presidential U.S. elections and how the polarization of media and the partisan selective exposure of a part of the North-American population might have helped Trump to win the presidency, due to only 70.000 votes which determined the final victory (Faris, Roberts, Etling, Bourassa, Zuckerman & Benkler, 2017). On the research publication of Faris et al. (2017) the authors argue that "the differences in party candidates grow over time and centrist voters were left with more extreme options that did not reflect their moderate views, which made moderate voters less likely to be engaged in politics (and less interested in voting the party options)" (p.41). Many factors coincided in the presidential elections of 2016 thus it is difficult to point out to a single reason for Trump's Presidential victory. Although, it can be argued that vote abstention and the lack of moderate views became, at the end of the race, decisive factors that marked the electoral campaign. The last US Presidential elections showed an exceptional increase of political polarization among the candidates, especially present in news outlets with partisan coverages and in social media with posts and comments of online users using negative campaigning tactics against the counter-party (Faris et al., 2017). The key question would be if the same electoral results could have been achieved if the media and the individuals had not adopted such strained positions based on discrediting the rival's beliefs. This question brought up to consider if a similar situation might have happened with the Catalan referendum. This research aims to bring answers of whether polarization and lack of moderate voices became real during this heated political event. 
      Scholars do not seem to agree whether polarized media encourages citizens to adopt more radical and polarized opinions, consequently exposing themselves to partisan selective media that reinforce one's beliefs or the other way around (Arceneaux & Martin, 2013; Levendusky, 2013; Prior, 2013). What is clear is that both phenomenona (polarization and selective exposure) are related and that one implies the other. The polarization of the media and its audiences in heated political moments tends to reinforce the differences and create stronger sides among a population, leading to misinformed citizens and erasing moderate positions (Feldman, 2018). Polarization and partisan media exposure are key concepts to understand the strain political situation in Catalonia after the regional elections of 2015 (BBC Mundo, 2015).
      Selective exposure and polarization will be assessed by assigning a priori partisan categorizations to media outlets (Catalan-based or Madrid-based) and then measuring participants' reported use of these outlets for political information during the Catalan referendum (Stroud, 2008). Therefore, hypotheses 1 and 2 assume that because of the singularities of the media in Catalonia and because of the heated and polarized political climate displayed, the Catalan citizens during the referendum of the 1st of October tended to read partisan news outlets that reinforced one's political stances on the matter, taking the online Spanish media and the online Catalan media into consideration. 
      H1: Pro-unitarism supporters read more Madrid-based online news outlets than pro-independence citizens.
      H2: Pro-independence supporters read more Catalan-based online news outlets than pro-unitarism citizens. 
      The author states in these directional hypotheses that the online news outlets were thought and perceived as polarized by the population around the 1st of October, thus attributing them to a partisan coverage of the event. The results can help to identify if there was an online media selective exposure among pro-independence and pro-unitarism supporters helping to increase the gap difference between the two main stances in the Catalan society, or if on the contrary, the citizens had not been carried away by the polarization and held moderate, plural or contrasted views even if they advocate for pro-unitarism or pro-independence of Catalonia. 
      11.4 2.4 Hostile media effect
       The Catalan referendum conflict, among many things, has helped to enhance polarization and has created two clear stances within the topic; either a citizen is considered to be a pro-independence or a pro-unitarism supporter. Consequently, it has toned down most of the grey/neutral position in the media, forcing individuals and outlets to take a clear stance in the political conflict. This thesis will use its findings to see if it is possible to make such claims by studying the Catalans attitudes towards counter-party messages and individuals and by looking at the online news outlets consumption. It is important to acknowledge that there is a section of the Catalan and Spanish population that neither believes in a complete rupture with Spain or with remaining with the actual centralist government, rather some citizens advocate for a middle stand solution, such as the North-American federalist state system. This discourse is only materialized in the political spectrum by the party Podemos, a recent left-wing political formation with representation in the Spanish Parliament but being only the fourth biggest political force. At the same time, there is not a clear-leading representative voice in the telecommunication field that advocates for such middle point in where is acknowledged that the actual 'Autonomías' system is deficient and a new ruling model should be theorized ("Clasificación Mundial 2018 de la Libertad de Prensa", 2018). According to the Digital News Report of Newman et al. (2017), La Vanguardia is the only leading newspaper and online news outlets that is considered to have a moderate paper in Catalonia and Spain, calling for dialogue in face of a devastating situation. Therefore, it is relevant to study the perception of Catalan citizens towards this news outlet, since if its perceived as biased among the population, it can result in the existence of another media phenomenon called hostile media effect. The hostile media effect can complement and more categorically endorse the claims of a polarized Catalan society due to if citizens are perceiving as biased a moderate and neutral outlet it can mean that the society is acquiring more political polarized attitudes, only trusting the media that supports one's beliefs. 
      When someone is searching for information, an important criterion that comes to play is the owns perception of quality in a publication/journalist. The hostile media effect explains the individual judgment of what is considered quality press or not and its subjectivity, related to one's own beliefs and how much a publication is favorable to those (Stroud, 2011). Thus, "the hostile media effect occurs when opposing partisans perceive identical news coverage of a controversial issue as biased against their own side" (Feldman, 2018, p.2). As a result, balanced media content is often perceived as biased, for both political sides that end up discrediting neutral media outlets (Reid, 2012). Although is important to clarify that the hostile media effect does not relate to an effect of the media per se but rather a response to media content potentially influencing attitudinal and behavioral outcomes (Feldman, 2018). The more involved and partisan an individual is, the more likely it is that this individual perceives as hostile a higher number of news outlets. 
      The term hostile media phenomenon was first coined and described by Vallone, Rosse and Lepper (1985) using the context of broadcast news stories about the Mideast conflict. Their study demonstrated the perceptual bias among participants with different opinions about the subject. Since then, several studies (Perloff, 1989; Giner-Sorolla & Chaiken, 1994) have continued studying this robust phenomenon and demonstrated its existence regarding controversial topics and mass-media coverage that ultimately have consequences for democratic societies. The hostile media effect contradicts another well-studied phenomenon, the assimilation bias, that is the predisposition to interpret information so that it appears to conform to one's preexisting attitudes and maintain one's initials beliefs (Gunther & Schmitt, 2004). But as the authors argue, what differentiates both phenomena is the low-reach or high-reach condition; "a low-reach (or no-reach) condition, such as when thinking only about influence on one's own opinion, would generate an assimilation response whereas the high-reach condition, thinking about influence on a broad audience, would result in a contrast effect" (Gunther & Schmitt, 2004, p.58). Therefore, this research will focus on the hostile media effect since online news outlets are a high-reach source of information it's more expected in the context of the study that a hostile media effect is being produced. In the end, as Stroud argues (2011), the outcome of the hostile media effect is that "nonneutral news are seen as more accurate, fairer, and more relevant to likeminded partisans compared to those with different views" (p.21). This effect illustrates that even if exists balanced or neutral media, in heated political situations, citizens take a partisan approach and tend to not rely on those sources, even if there is a rigorous journalistic job done or strong evidence in a matter. In this research, the concept will be taken in consideration in order to analyze if during the Catalan referendum event the patterns of media consumption of the Catalan society were subject to a 'hostile media effect' that made consume only certain online news outlets to the two main political sides: pro-independence and pro-unitarism. 
      La Vanguardia is considered to be the only traditional press title that holds a moderate perspective as it is argued in the Digital News Reports (Newman et al, 2018, p.102). The exclusively online media El Diario and El Confidencial are also considerate independent and journalistically motivated organisations but, they do not possess as many readers as La Vanguardia (Newman et al, 2018, p.102). The online version of La Vanguardia is the most daily consulted online site in Catalonia when people are looking for political news outlets (Centre d'Estudis d'Opinió, 2018, p.68). Being the most popular online media site among Catalans one would expect that part of the Catalan population can be exposed to plural news reports but, if a hostile media effect is taken into consideration, then the media effects of the newspaper gets limited. Hypotheses 3 and 4 are aimed to analyze whether La Vanguardia was actually perceived as a moderate/neutral media by both ideological stances or if on the contrary it was challenged, tackling the concept of hostile media effect. 
      H3: The online news outlet La Vanguardia is considered by pro-independence supporters to be biased upon the news treatment of the Catalan referendum.
      H4: The online news outlet La Vanguardia is considered by pro-unitarism supporters to be biased upon the news treatment of the Catalan referendum.
      11.5 2.5 Affective polarization
      During heated political events the attitudinal polarization within a society can lead to an affective polarization of individuals, developing hostile attitudes towards counterparties discourses that challenge and argues one's political stances, increasing the animosity among citizens. 
      The first to study and distinguish affective polarization from other forms of political polarization were Iyengar, Sood and Lelkes (2012) in the United States political context where there are two leading political parties and tendencies: Democrats and Republicans. They define the effect as an emotional reaction to party identification in where individuals display hostility attitudes towards the members of opposing political parties. Put in it in other words, it could be defined as the tendency of supporters from two different political parties' slants, ideologies or stances to dislike and distrust one another. Affective polarization seems to be grounded in in-group and out-group distinctions, in where individuals identify themselves as being part of a political collectivity or with a political party and display simultaneously in-group favouritism and out-group hostility (Turner, Brown & Tajfel, 1979). This identification gives rise to in-group bias, identifying the opposing views negatively and the co-partisan positively (Iyengar & Westwood, 2014). As Mason argues (2016) "because a highly aligned set of social identities increases an individual's perceived differences between groups, the emotions that result from group conflict are likely to be heightened among well-sorted partisans" (p.352). It can be argued that in heated and polarized political events individuals can display more emotional instead of rational political choices and behaviours. As Crigler and Hevron (2017) discussed in the Oxford Handbook of Political Communication, "emotions function as critical factors of political choice by explaining how people communicate about politics, how they seek information and learn, how they make judgments and form preferences, and how they participate" (p.3). Emotional appeals are particularly influential on individuals' appraisals made based on group identity. Researchers have seized upon emotion as an important trigger of attitudes toward policies dealing with in- and out-groups, which can lead to erroneous issue judgments (Brader, Valentino & Suhay, 2008). Although, is important to acknowledge that not all the individuals are engaged at the same level with politics and group identities. The degree of which an individual gets identify with a particular political group or party its very relevant to assess affective polarization, due to those who do not feel closely associated with a party feel less angry, because their esteem is less closely tied to the status of the group (Mason, 2016). Therefore, "the effect of identity on emotion is significant because it generates less emotion at the low end of the spectrum, and more emotion among the highly identified" (Mason, 2016, p.4).
       The consequences of affective polarization can be harmful to a country's society due it can increase the animosity of citizens' interactions, becoming less deliberative and more partisan (Garrett et al., 2014). Aversive reactions can promote political cynicism, incivility, and intolerance among a population and making citizens less likely to seek diverse perspectives on controversial topics (Garrett et al., 2014).
      Garrett et al. (2014) conducted a study using survey data collected immediately following national elections in the United States and Israel revealing that "the more extensively individuals rely on partisan sources affirming their political viewpoint, the more polarized their attitudes toward other partisans" (p. 324). This implies that as partisan news becomes more popular, affective polarization is likely to increase because sympathetic media tend to be used more often than the alternative. Using the previous theoretical ground on the subject, the author will affirm that in the Catalan conflict, an affective polarization effect could have been encountered on both ideological groups (pro-independence and pro-unitarism supporters) displaying hostility to counter-argumentations and the respective out-group. The hypotheses imply that emotional factors influenced and reinforced animosity among both political stances towards the referendum. Hypotheses 5 and 6 will analyze both main ideological leanings upon the referendum. 
      H5: Most supporters of the independence of Catalonia are hostile towards pro-unitarism supporters.
      H6: Most supporters of the pro-unitarism of Catalonia are hostile towards pro-independence supporters.
      Further, it is possible to argue that the increase of affective polarization among citizens in recent years is a response or is fostered by polarized political elites (Banda & Cluverius, 2018). Higher polarization of political elites makes parties more differentiated among each other and that can consequently increase mass polarization in the citizenship level (Banda & Cluverius, 2018).  Therefore, hypotheses 7 and 8 will study affective polarization using the same parallelism among both ideological groups but towards polarized political elites. The aim is to study and compare if affective polarization is only produced (or not) towards out-group peers or is more likely to be promoted toward counter-political elites rather than common citizens or voters that support counter-parties. This way, the results can show which type and in which degree affective polarization was displayed (or not) during the referendum, rather towards individuals, political elites or both.
      H7: There is a relationship between a supporter's political leaning and being hostile towards the out-group political elites.
      Lastly, the author considers is relevant to examine if affective polarization and selective exposure are related phenomena in the political context of the Catalan referendum to properly answer the research question and relate the different media phenomena studied throughout the thesis. In other words, if a relationship existed between the online news outlets consumption readership of individuals and these becoming more affective polarized. Is it possible that the regular exposure to partisan and polarized online media outlets can also enhance affective polarization towards counter-party supporters? Can the media help increase divergent ideologically slants and incivility among citizens with their way of framing and portraying a specific political event? Some authors already strongly suggest that there is a connection between these two media phenomena, arguing that when citizens are exposed to media coverage depicting mass polarization, they start displaying more hostile attitudes and behaviours towards individuals supporting divergent slants to theirs (Levendunsky & Maholtra, 2015; Garrett et al., 2014). Therefore, hypotheses 9 and 10 will study if there is a relationship between reading certain news outlets and an individual becoming less tolerant towards the out-group individuals. The results can help the author to discuss if the partisan selective media exposure of Catalan citizens could also have led to creating/increasing hostility and animosity among the population during that period of time. 
      H8: Most readers of Catalan-based online news outlets are hostile towards pro-unitarism supporters.
      H9: Most readers of Madrid-based online news outlets are hostile towards pro-independence supporters.
      11.6 2.6 Summary 
      As discussed in the prior sections, this research will study the possible media effects of consuming mainly partisan online news outlets using as a case of study the Catalan referendum held the 1st of October of 2017 that can be considered as a controversial and heated political event for the Catalan society. 
      Overall, the research will try to conclude if a "partisan selective exposure relates to more polarized attitudes among audiences" (Stroud, 2010, p.571) focusing on the specific period of time surrounding the Catalan referendum and its political consequences among the Catalan population. Even if the main political communication theories will be the polarization of attitudes and the selective exposure to slanted news outlets, other media and attitudinal effects will be also studied in order to have better insights of what media effects were displayed by the citizens and in which degree. Therefore, the research will also pay attention to the hostile media effect and to affective polarization to analyze in more depth the behavioural patterns of media consumption of Catalans during the referendum and the possible attitudinal consequences towards out-group stances. These phenomena might have contributed to polarizing the Catalan society creating hostility among citizens that sustain one of the two main leading ideological postures in the conflict, being these, either supporting the independence or the unitarism of Catalonia. The outcome results might challenge (or not) the theory of a polarized and partisan selective exposure media landscape and citizens, as well as showing, whether a hostile media effect and affective polarization were being displaced by individuals during the time when the referendum was held. 
      Polarization, selective exposure, hostile media effect and affective polarization can imply serious consequences in a democratic society with a 'polarized pluralistic' media model where media is not as independent, with strong connections between media conglomerates and political elites that might stand up for their own political interests. Ultimately, studying this media phenomena and its consequences can bring answers of the media limitations and effects in fracturing social harmony, decreasing an individual's tolerance towards discrepant ideological views and erasing plurality, thus the relevance of the topic. 
      










12 3. Methodology 
This chapter will explain and argue the methodology used to conduct the research and to test the hypotheses. It will justify in detail the quantitative method selected, the sampling process, the steps conducted to design the survey, the operationalization of the variables, as well as the process to achieve validity and reliability within the results.
      12.1 3.1 Choice of method
      A quantitative research approach was adopted in order to adequately answer the proposed research question. The quantitative measurement logic was taken into consideration at an early stage of the research since the goal of the thesis was to capture details of the empirical world and express the findings in numbers (Neuman, 2014). It also used theory-driven or top-down research strategies, in which the hypotheses were stated using previous literature, academical articles and social science researchers before the data gathering or analyzed processes had started (De Leeuw, Hox & Dillman, 2008). It was crucial to use a research method through which it was possible to achieve standardized and uniformed numerical data that could represent the abstract concepts of 'polarization', 'selective exposure', 'hostile media effect' and 'affective polarization'. Surveys are the method that most accurately followed this logic, enabling the design of regulated questions/answers that can be distributed to a large number of individuals achieving, in the end, standardized and uniformed results (Neuman, 2014). 
      The aim of the research is to gather self-reported behaviour about the online news outlets media consumption of the Catalan society and their political beliefs upon the referendum to study and analyze if the beforementioned media phenomena were being displayed by the Catalan population during the 1st of October of 2017. This is the main reason why a cross-sectional survey was selected as the most convenient research method for this thesis, due to it allows the data collection to make inferences about a population of interest at one point in time thus creating a snapshot of the Catalan society during a specific time period (Hall, 2011). The type of cross-sectional survey that was selected as a mode for data collection is the self-reported online survey seeing that it guaranteed the access through online platforms, to the sampling population that is in a different country than the researcher (Hall, 2011). This quantitative method grants - through a series of questions and set of variables - to" gather descriptive information and test multiple hypotheses in a single survey" (Neuman, 2014, p.317). Also, it allows the collection of large amounts of factual data about the opinions, ideas, attitudes or experiences of the participants upon the topic of the research (Matthews & Ross, 2010). Later this data can be analyzed using quantitative data analysis programs that will outcome in percentages and numerical results. 
      It is common and validated among scholars to use a survey design in order to measure media phenomena such as selective exposure and polarization; "the self-report retrospective strategy seems to be the most widely used in the extant research on selective exposure, in particular when it comes to surveying research" (e.g., Daniller, Silver, & Moehler, 2013; Dvir-Gvirsman, 2014; Garrett et al., 2014; J. Kim, 2015; Lawrence, Sides, & Farrell, 2010; Tsfati, Stroud, & Chotiner, 2014 as cited in Tsfati, 2016, p. 201).  
      Therefore, using a questionnaire is considered to be a validated tool to analyze if the phenomena of selective media exposure and polarization took place among the Catalan population regarding the referendum. Through a series of key questions and statements, the results of the survey reflected whether this media approach has arisen or not among the Catalan citizens during that specific period of time. However, it is important to acknowledge the method limitations when it comes to asking participants about an opinion and media behaviour in the past, as is the case of this research, going back to the events of one year and a half ago. As Neuman (2014) points out "the issue of respondent recall does not mean that we cannot ask about past events; rather, we must write survey questions specifically for that purpose and interpret results with caution" (p. 327). 
      The survey was designed using Qualtrics, an online survey platform that was provided by the Erasmus University of Rotterdam. This online software allowed the researcher to build an online survey with a clear and neat interface and enabled respondents to participate using their computers and even more conveniently, using their phones. Qualtrics guaranteed an easy and effortless access to the survey, which was one of the most relevant criteria when deciding to use this specific survey platform due to people being typically reluctant to answer questionnaires and more so when it implies sensitive matters such as ideologies or political manifestations. Thus, an easy, clear and quick access to the survey was crucial to obtain the appropriate number of respondents. 
      12.2 3.2 Sampling population 
      The target population is Catalan citizens due to them being the largest group of individuals that experienced the referendum firsthand and that can better understand the nuances of the both, Catalan-based and Madrid-based, online news outlets, contrasting for example, with Spanish citizens. Although, not all Catalan citizens have the right characteristics to become eligible for the sampling frame of this research. The researcher intended to achieve a sample with heterogenic participants of different ages, gender and from different geographical areas of Catalonia. Another characteristic to take into consideration was the fact that the research was focusing on online news outlets consumption and not all individuals use this technology to gather political information. Therefore, to be considered part of the sample, participants had to meet the following criteria: (1) be Catalan residents (meaning that it was not required to be born in Catalonia, but they had to reside in a Catalan region during the political event), (2) be older than 18 years old and (3) readers of online news outlets.
      Continuing with the sampling design, the sample size was decided based on what the Methodological guidelines of the Erasmus University determined as a specification for the MA thesis. In the survey it was suggested that the minimum number of respondents for the method of surveys had to be between 150 and 250 respondents. Another relevant specification was that in order to have a sample large enough to represent the population, both ideological stances reflected on the hypotheses, had to have a minimum of 30 respondents supporting one of the two possible political sides within the sample (either pro-independence or pro-unitarism ideological leaning) in order to confirm the hypotheses that related to that specific target group of the sample (Salkind, 2017). 
      The type of sampling that was used in this thesis was a mix of non-probabilistic or non-random sampling methods. These subjective methods were adopted to decide which elements should be included in the sample (Sarstedt, Bengart, Shaltoni & Lehmann, 2017). A probabilistic or random sampling method would have implied that each element in the population had a known nonzero chance of being selected through the use of a random selection procedure, but in this thesis, it was not possible to have access to a probabilistic-representative method (Sarstedt, Bengart, Shaltoni & Lehmann, 2017). Therefore, the sampling method used to gather participants was a mix of convenience, purposive and self-selection. The convenience method meant that some participants were selected because of the ease as a primary selection criterion, in the sense of locating elements of the population and from selected elements (Battaglia, 2011). Purposive sampling differed from convenience only because in that method expert judgment was used to select a representative sample of elements (Battaglia, 2011). The self-selection method implied that the inclusion of sampling units was determined by whether the units themselves agreed to participate voluntarily in the sample or not (Sterba & Foster, 2011). These three methods were used simultaneously as sampling methods due to there being some minimum of 30 respondents' in each quota that was necessary to achieve in some variables (age, gender, political leaning) in order to accomplish the most possible heterogenic population that could imitate, in a small-scale, the characteristics of the Catalan society and was representative of the different political sensibilities of the Catalan citizens. Even if it was not possible to have an equal number of participants for each quota it aimed to achieved a minimum number of 30 participants for each category of the demographic variables (gender, age) and among the variable of political leaning, avoiding coverage errors and aiming to include all the different social stratum within the Catalan population (Neuman, 2014).  
      The Qualtrics survey was shared simultaneously, using the form of an anonymous link, through different online channels and platforms. The survey aimed to have all the participants answers around the same period of time, to avoid errors produced by collecting the data in different time periods for the same sample (Neuman, 2014). Moreover, this thesis used cross-sectional survey data, which implied that the data had to be collected at only one point of time. The researcher distributed the online survey through Facebook groups and WhatsApp groups, with members/participants that shared or had different political views upon the Catalan referendum held the 1st of October 2017 in order to find plural political stances among the sample. This way, the survey link was posted in groups such as "Catalanes que no quieren la independencia" or "Catalans a favor de la independència". 
      The data collection took place between the 6th and the 17th of May 2019. This fact is relevant because it was important to collect the data before the trials of the Catalan politicians ended and before the European and municipal elections took place at the end of May, due to depending on both circumstances maybe some individuals could radicalize or change their opinions/views. 
      A total of 371 responses were recorded, although, it was not possible to determine how many people encountered the anonymous link of the survey without clicking on it. From those, 134 partially filled out the survey or took less than 3 minutes to answer the whole survey, thus they are not considered to be part of the sample due to were there being doubts about the legitimacy of the answers and the likelihood that it was random. As Lynn argues, "for web surveys, levels of break-off are typically higher than with other survey modes. This is where a respondent gets a certain way through the questionnaire and then decides not to continue" (Lynn, 2012, p.41). In the case of the survey of this thesis there might be also other reasons for the high rate of non-response, such as the fact that the topic of the survey was a controversial political subject that some people are typically reluctant to give their opinion on and even if the length was adjusted, nine minutes is still a high amount of time that a respondent needs to invest selflessly. Although, as Lynn (2012) also argues even the most well-designed survey suffers from non-response rates so it should not illegitimate the results or findings.
      After the data cleaning, the final sample includes 237 respondents, 63.9% response rate, which was considered as a desired number of participants. From those 69 are pro-unitarism supporters, 30.5% of the sample, which denotes that the pro-unitarism hypotheses can be validated and 156 pro-independence supporters, the 69%. 1 respondent did not state an answer.
      From the 237 respondents, 83.1% decided to answer the survey in Catalan and 16.9% in Spanish. 61.2% were female and 38.4% male. 88.6% were born in Catalonia, 11% reside in Catalonia and 0.4% did not respond to the question. 87.3% of respondents resided in Barcelona, 4.2% in Girona, 3.4% in Lleida and 4.6% in Tarragona. The average age was 46 years (M = 46.20, SD = 13.77). 8% of the participants were between 18 and 24 years old, 12.9% between 25 and 34 years old, 35.3% between 35 and 49 years old, 36.3% between 50 and 64 years old and 7.6% 64 and older. 79.7% of the respondents read every day or almost every day online news outlets, 8.9% two or three times per week, 3.8% once per week, 3.4% two or three times per month and 4.2% never, which implies that they finished the questionnaire after that answer and were not taken into consideration in the analysis. Regarding the multiple-choice question about which online news outlets respondents accessed recently, 19.9% selected TV3, 15.9% La Vanguardia and Vilaweb, 14.9% Ara, 13.5% others and 8.3% El País. 
      When comparing the demographics of the sample with the demographics that the official statistical organization in Catalonia used in their research about political opinion of the citizens, it is possible to see how some of the demographics are more representative than others of the Catalan population in the thesis. In the 'Baròmetre d'Opinió Política', 74.7% of respondents resided in the province of Barcelona, 9.7% in Girona, 5.3% in Lleida and 10.3% in Tarragona, having a similar weighting of percentages in the thesis sample (Centre d'Estudis d'Opinió, 2018, p.55). The percentages of gender, age categories and language preference of the respondents cannot be considered representative, if they are compared to the aforementioned Barometer due to the quota numbers are differently distributed in the thesis. 
      12.3 3.3 Survey design 
      The survey was designed so it could gather information about one's political views and online news outlets media consumption, upon what it could be considered a sensitive and highly debated topic in Catalonia: whether if someone was in favour or against the self-determination referendum celebration. For this reason, how the survey is built and what type of questions and statements are included, is a crucial step, in order to obtain valid and reliable means without leading the participant's choices and setting a favourable tone for all types of feedback. 
      The survey methodology requires diligence, if one does not want to end up having misleading or biased results (Neuman, 2014), thus it is also important to investigate whether specification errors can occur, while building the survey, to assure validity within the results (De Leeuw, Hox & Dillman, 2008). Pallant (2016) argues that before distributing a survey is important to first run a pilot-test to ensure that the instructions, questions, and scale items are clear and to select as participants the same type of people that would be used in the main study. That is the reason why a pre-test was made before configuring the final questionnaire in order to test first, with 5 real participants, if the survey fulfils all the requirements (De Leeuw, Hox & Dillman, 2008). 
      The pre-test questionnaire included 92 questions (46 for the Spanish respondents and 46 for the Catalan ones). Once the pre-test survey was completed by the five participants, these were asked to reply via email to a series of questions regarding the length of the survey, the understandability of the questions and language used through the entire survey, the mutually exclusiveness and exhaustiveness of the answer categories and a final open question about further comments or observations (Neuman, 2014). The feedback of the participants showed that almost all of them agreed in the fact that the survey was too long, taking an average time of 15 minutes to be answered. Therefore, some questions of the survey were eliminated based on the fact that it may be perceived as repetitive or not as relevant for the research. For example, the multiple-choice questions regarding consumption and trust of different online news outlets, the list of answer categories were shortened, from 12 to 10 categories including only the main and most well-recognized online newspaper titles but including an open answer category as the last option where people could still list an online news outlet in case it was not there as an answer category. The last part of the survey, where five different fragments of real online news outlets articles talking about the referendum were presented, was also shortened, including in the final survey only three, one that represented the pro-unitarism discourse, one the neutral discourse and one the pro-independence discourse.
       With all these changes the final survey was composed by 62 questions, combining both languages options, but respondents only had to answer 31 of those in the language preference that they choose at the beginning of the survey. Individuals took an average time of 9 minutes to reply to the whole survey. Also, the results of the pre-test showed that two of the questions of the survey were not being correctly interpreted. This could be understood as an observational error in the survey, that was made visible during the pre-test data collection process and made the researcher to adapt the questions and answer categories in order to make them more clear, intelligible and exhaustive (Kish, 1965).
      The final questionnaire was carefully built implementing the beforementioned results of the pre-test and by paying attention to certain aspects that could be especially relevant for the sample. One of the first things acknowledged while creating the survey was the broadness of the sample, with participants of different demographic traits and backgrounds. For this reason, the survey should not include confusing words in any of the questions/statements/answer categories. Common words were used throughout the questionnaire avoiding the prestige bias, meaning that academical terms or words that might lead to confusion and misunderstandings were not used in the questionnaire (Neuman, 2014). Furthermore, Lozar Manfreda and Vehovar (2012) argue in their chapter about characteristics of Internet surveys, that while designing a questionnaire "the question/answer texts should be kept short, concise, and clearly presented because Internet users seldom read the text carefully, but rather scan it" (p.276).
       Another relevant factor concerning the sample of the thesis was the possible language preference that a respondent could have, thus including in the questionnaire a preliminary statement in where all the respondents could choose between doing the survey in Spanish or in Catalan. This feature of the questionnaire was strategically thought beforehand, and it was especially relevant for this type of research, since language is a sensitive topic among Catalans. Even if almost everyone understands and speaks both languages, it is frequent that individuals feel more comfortable with one of the languages. If the option of doing the questionnaire in one of the languages would not have been included, the researcher could have been risking the response rate and the neutrality of the questionnaire, since some people could have been reluctant to answer the survey because of this factor or/and excluded because of not having a good command of the language imposed. Also, some people give political meaning to the fact of using either Spanish or Catalan, being the Spanish language more frequently used among pro-unitarism supporters and Catalan among pro-independence supporters. The researcher aimed to build a neutral questionnaire in where all respondents felt open to give their opinion and where it was used a tone equally clear for all the respondents. The language factor also implied, the duplication and literal translation of the questionnaire in order to have the same anonymous link for all the participants.
      The first question the respondents encountered by accessing the survey was the language preference. After that, the survey showed a brief text in where it was stated the topic of the survey, the anonymity of the participants that Qualtrics secures, the length of the survey and a button of clear consent from the participant. Consecutively, the demographic and filter questions, that predetermined whether the participants were eligible to be part of the sample. The survey ended if the participant replied that they had never read online news outlets. The criterion of age was evaluated manually by looking at the year of birth and the residency factor was exposed and explained at the introduction of the survey. After those first blocks, the survey flow showed 25 questions that respondents had to answer for enabling the researcher to validate or reject the hypotheses and answer the research question.
      Continuing with other considerations while building the survey, it was considered that each question or statement had to be related to one concept, topic or factor of the research, although certain questions were used to test different hypotheses, which will be further explained in more detail. All response choices were written to be equally eligible and legitimate (and had the same order and options in both Catalan and Spanish surveys). The answer categories were mutually exclusive and followed criteria of exhaustiveness. In the multiple-choice questions it was always included, and in the end, a last open answer category. Questions and answer categories were written following balance criteria, being cautious with the words used when duplicating the questions and answer categories in one of the languages, so both surveys would be equally mutually exclusive and exhaustive. (Neuman, 2014). 
      Control questions and statements were added to achieve consistency within the answers and to avoid the social desirability bias, that can happen when the respondents do not answer honestly but rather follow what they think is acceptable for society standards to be answered (Neuman, 2014). The respondent recall was also taken into consideration, thus the questionnaire was built in a way that was easy for the participants to answer questions about past behaviors and thoughts. For example, graphics of real articles headings and fragments were included to enable participants to see how the different online news outlets were relating what happened on the 1st of October of 2017.
      12.4 3.4 Operationalization
      The operationalization of the variables implies deducing conceptualized variables into measurable units to include in the survey. The operational definition of this thesis was through the survey questionnaire that linked conceptual definitions to a set of measurement techniques (Neuman, 2014). 
      In total, six different variables are used including categorical and continuous variables: supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia, the readership of online news outlets based on their provenience, perception of online news outlets discourse, social distance towards out-group individuals, affective polarization towards out-group individuals and hostility towards out-group of political elites. Consecutively, it is explained how it was operationalized in the survey each variable and which measuring instruments were used.
      Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia. This is a categorical (nominal) and independent variable with two categories, pro-unitarism supporter and pro-independence supporter. It was measured using a single answer question that asked for the type of relationship that Spain and Catalonia should have according to the respondent beliefs. The possible answer categories were: 1 a region of Spain, 2 an autonomous community (the current political relationship), 3 a state inside a federal Spain or 4 an independent state. It was not included an answer category of 'no position or no opinion' upon the subject since the four answer categories reflected all the possible political positions and due to it was necessary that all respondents had a political stance about the relationship of Spain and Catalonia in order to measure the main concepts of this thesis. The first three categories, even if they implied different types of relationships between Catalonia and Spain (from more centralized to more decentralized) they all considered Catalonia as being part of Spain thus attributing them the category of being pro-unitarism. The remaining answer category was attributed as being a pro-independence supporter because it explicitly mentioned the fact of Catalonia being a separate and independent state from the rest of the country. The questions and answer categories were adopted from the question 30 of the 'Baròmetre d'Opinió Política' 3rd wave of 2018 from the Catalan opinion center 'Centre d'Estudis d'Opinió' and adapted to the research (Centre d'Estudis d'Opinió, 2018, p.74). This variable was used to measure the political leaning of each respondent in order to test several of the hypotheses since it predetermines the stance of each respondent upon the referendum of the 1st of October 2017. 
      Readership of online news outlets based on their provenience. This is a categorical (nominal) variable with two categories: readers of Catalan-based online news outlets and readers of Madrid-based online news outlets. The categories were assigned to each respondent using the answers given to a multiple-choice type of answer in where the respondent had to select which of the news outlets he/she used to gather information during the 1st of October. The answer categories were El País, El Mundo, ABC, La Razón, La Vanguardia, El Diario, TV3, Ara, Vilaweb and an open answer category at the end. Depending on the online news outlets that the respondent clicked and the nature of them (either they reported in Catalan or in Spanish) it was assigned one of the categories to each respondent as mainly being Catalan or Madrid-based readers. The measurement used to calculate whether a respondent was a Catalan-based or Madrid-based reader it was by giving a score to each online news outlet. -0,16 for each Madrid-based online news outlets that a respondent clicked (due to there are 6 options in the answer categories) and 0.33 for each Catalan-based online news outlets (due to there are 3 options in the answer categories).After that, if the overall score was higher than 0 the respondent was considered a Catalan-based reader and if the score was lower than 0 a Madrid-based reader. The question and answer categories were adapted from the report 'Standard Eurobarometer 80' of media use made by the European Commission in Autumn 2013.
      It was used as a dependent variable to test selective exposure in hypotheses 1 and 2. It was used as an independent variable to measure selective exposure in relation to affective polarization of individuals in hypotheses 9 and 10. 
      Perception of the online news outlets discourse. This categorical (ordinal) and dependent variable measures hostile media effect in hypotheses 3 and 4. The variable has three categories: 1 for pro-independence discourse, 2 for neutral discourse and 3 for pro-unitarism discourse. To measure this variable, it was used in the survey a Matrix-Scale with four columns (pro-independence discourse, neutral discourse, pro-unitarism discourse or I don't have an opinion) and 9 rows with the list of online news outlets (El País, El Mundo, ABC, La Razón, La Vanguardia, El Diario, TV3, Ara, Vilaweb). The question stated: "Do you think that the following online news outlets reported news during the 1st October of 2017 with pro-independence, pro-unitarism or neutral discourses? Please, indicate your perception for each of the online news outlets". The question and answer categories are again adapted from the report 'Standard Eurobarometer 80' of media use made by the European Commission in Autumn 2013. From this variable it was created nine different variables measuring the perception of each online news outlet. For testing the hostile media effect, it will be used specifically, the variable of perception of La Vanguardia discourse. The rest of variables will be used to complement results. 
      Social distance towards out-group individuals. This continuous and dependent variable measures affective polarization towards individuals with a different political leaning than the respondent. It was operationalized in the survey design using a Likert-Scale asking about how comfortable a respondent would feel having a close friend that supports the contrary belief of the respondent (1 being very uncomfortable and 4 being very comfortable). Depending on what the respondent had clicked as their leaning the survey flow would show this question with the contrary stance. The variable applied the measurement of the research appendix of Levendunsky & Maholtra (2015) article 'Does Media Coverage of Partisan Polarization Affect Political Attitudes?'. 
      Affective polarization towards out-group individuals. It was decided to measure affective polarization using another question of the survey. In this case the variable is nominal (dichotomous) and dependent. It was operationalize using a single-answer that asked for why the respondent support one of the stances. The possible answer categories were: because of what the unitarism/independence movement represents or because I hate unitarism/independence supporters. The variable applied the measurement of the research appendix of Levendunsky & Maholtra (2015) article 'Does Media Coverage of Partisan Polarization Affect Political Attitudes?'. 
      Hostility towards the out-group of political elites. This continuous and dependent variable measured affective polarization towards political elites depending on their political stances upon the referendum. It was operationalized in the questionnaire using the question that asked for the opinion of the seven main political leaders during the referendum (Xavier García Albiol, Carles Puigdemont, Oriol Junqueras, Anna Gabriel, Inés Arrimadas, Miquel Iceta, Xavier Doménech). Each politician was the leader of one of the main parties in Catalonia with clear stances upon the referendum. Xavier García Albiol, Inés Arrimadas, Miquel Iceta and Xavier Doménech, even in different degrees, their parties support the unitarism and Carles Puigdemont, Oriol Junqueras and Anna Gabriel parties the independence of Catalonia. Favorability ratings utilized an 11-point feeling thermometer. Respondents were told "we would like to know your feelings toward some political figures on a scale from 0 to 10" (0 = exceptionally unfavorable to 10 = exceptionally favorable". The respondent had to rate this 11-Point Likert-Scale each political leader performance, from their point of view, during the referendum. The measurements and the question were applied to this thesis from the research of Garrett, Gvirsman, Johnson, Tsfati, Neo and Dal (2014, p. 317).
      12.4.1 3.4.1 Operationalization of exploratory variables
      The survey questionnaire included some questions that do not measure directly the variables of the hypotheses but contribute to better answer the research question and hypotheses, broaden the results and discussion and bringing more nuances to the interpretation of the same. 
      Trust upon online news outlets. This variable measures the level of trust of the participants towards online news outlets during the 1st of October of 2017 using a 5-Point Likert scale (1 = being completely distrust and 5 = completely trust) upon 9 items, El País, El Mundo, ABC, La Razón, La Vanguardia, El Diario, TV3, Vilaweb and Ara. After conducting a factor analysis and reliability test, explained in more detail in the reliability section, this variable was computed as two new variables that would differentiate between trust upon Catalan online news outlets (TV3, Vilaweb and Ara) and trust upon Spanish online news outlets (El Mundo, La Razón, ABC). The question and scale are again adopted from the report 'Standard Eurobarometer 80' of media use made by the European Commission in Autumn 2013 and adapted to the topic of the research.
      Selective exposure. This continuous and independent variable measured the degree of selective exposure that an individual might be exposed to. It was operationalized by using the Tendency Toward Congruent Selective Exposure (TECSE) scale of Tsfati (2016). As the author argued "the newly proposed measure contains five indicators. The items in the TECSE include (1) "I try to avoid exposure to media outlets expressing irritating opinions"; (2) "I try to expose myself only to media outlets and news messages that are in line with my own attitudes"; (3) "I try to expose myself to all the opinions heard in the media equally" (reverse coded); (4) "If I need to select between two op-ed pieces, I'll choose the one that is closer to my opinions"; and (5) "It is important for me to read not just articles supporting my views, but also articles opposing my views" (reverse coded)" (Tsfati, 2016, p.205).  The items were measured using a 5-point Likert-scale being 1 strongly disagree and 5 strongly agree. The items of the scale were translated to Spanish and Catalan but other than that the scale was used as the original author proposed. 
      The last blocks of the survey included three images with real headings from the 1st of October of 2017 from online articles that belong to three different online news outlets (the first to El País, the second to La Vanguardia and the third to TV3). In every case, the same three questions followed each image asking to the respondents about their opinion upon the trustworthiness of the news message, the discomfort caused by the news message and if the participant could indicate to which news outlet he/she thinks it belongs to. The question about the trustworthiness of the news message state "According to you, indicate if the article reports in a trustworthy way the events develop during the 1st of October". The answers were measured using a 4-Point Likert-Scale 1 being not at all and 4 being extremely. The question about the discomfort caused by the news message asked if the respondent could indicate if they felt annoyed by the way on which the article reported about the 1st of October. The answers were measured using a 4-Point Likert-Scale 1 being Not at all annoyed and 4 being Extremely annoyed. Both Likert-Scale were adapted from the Levendunsky & Maholtra (2015) research 'Does Media Coverage of Partisan Polarization Affect Political Attitudes?'. The last question regarding the identification of the articles, was a single-answer question that state "To which online news outlet do you think it belong?". The possible answer categories were: 1 La Razón, 2 La Vanguardia, 3 El País, 4 Vilaweb, 5 TV3 and 6 none of the previous ones.
      Therefore, nine variables were created to measure the respondents answers and interpret the results:
      Trustworthiness of the news message El País. Scale variable
      Discomfort caused by the news message El País. Scale variable
News outlet identification El País. Nominal variable
      Trustworthiness of the news message La Vanguardia. Scale variable
      Discomfort caused by the news message La Vanguardia. Scale variable
News outlet identification La Vanguardia. Nominal variable
      Trustworthiness of the news message TV3. Scale variable
      Discomfort caused by the news message TV3. Scale variable
News outlet identification TV3. Nominal variable
      12.4.2 3.4.2 Control Variables
      There are 4 questions that were included in the survey but weren't used to measure directly the variables beforementioned or to test the hypotheses made, but rather, to complement the results of the thesis. Control variables are defined by Taylor (2012) as variables that" are known to or expected to influence the dependent variable and might also affect the explanatory or independent variable in an analysis but is not the focus of interest for the researcher" (p. 234). Therefore, the control variables were used to test the influence of potentially cofounding factors with the other main variables (Taylor, 2012). Thereupon, it will be explained which variables have been included as control variables and how were operationalize in the survey questionnaire. 
      Age. This continuous and independent variable was used to explore if there existed a relationship between a respondent's answers and their age using five different categories: 1 for 18 to 24 years old, 2 for 25 to 34 years old, 3 for 35 to 49 years old, 4 for 50 to 64 years old and 5 for 65 and older.
      Gender. This categorical and independent variable was used to explore if there was a difference between the groups 'male' and 'female'. 
      Language. This categorical and independent variable relates to the language preference of the respondent when making the questionnaire. The options were either Catalan or Spanish and those were used too as categories for this variable. 
      Political party. This categorical and independent variable relates to the political party affiliation that each respondent marked as having more sympathy to. It was operationalized with the question "Could you indicate to which political party do you have more sympathy for?" and with the following answer categories: 1 for Partido Popular, 2 for Esquerra Republicana, 3 for Partit Socialista de Catalunya, 4 for Ciutadans, 5 for CUP, 6 for PdeCat, 7 for Catalunya en Comú Podem, 8 for Other parties and 9 for None. 
      12.5 3.5 Analysis
      The research gathered and processed large amounts of quantitative data, therefore, it is needed the support of a software program to adequately analyze all the inputs received and trace clear and reliable results of the investigation. The program SPSS is an optimal tool to process and analyze the data among different types of variables. With this program, it can be achieved standardized and uniformed numerical data results that will allow the use of different statistical measurements to either accept or reject the hypotheses and answer the research question properly. 
      To test hypotheses 1 and 2 the researcher looked at the variables Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia, and Readership of online news outlets based on their provenience and run a test of independence Chi-square (with two dimensions) to explore if they were related with a type of association Phi coefficient since both variables are nominal (Salkind, 2017). It was decided to run two complementary independent samples t-test between the variable Supporters leaning and the variables Trust upon Catalan online news outlets and Trust upon Spanish online news outlets in order to analyze if the level of trust that respondents give to the news outlets change depending on the provenience of the outlets (Salkind,2017). The second test ran was a t-test between Supporters leaning and Selective exposure, to enrich the findings and explore if pro-independence or pro-unitarism political leaning influences individuals to have selective exposure towards likeminded media.   
      Testing for hypotheses 3 and 4 it was used the same test of independence Chi-square but with a Gamma coefficient of correlation, since Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia is a dichotomous variable and Perception of La Vanguardia discourse is ordinal. 
      Hypotheses 5 and 6 aimed to find out whether there is a difference in the average scores of the dependent and continuous variable Social distance towards out-group of individuals between two groups, pro-unitarism and pro-independence supporters. Since the hypotheses are compound by a continuous dependent variable and a nominal independent variable with two categories the most suitable test to run is two one-sample t-tests. In order to complement the results, it was run a Chi-square goodness of fit test using a 50% proportion between the nominal variables Affective polarization towards out-group individuals and Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia, both with two categories. 
      Testing hypothesis 7 included two t-tests for independent means among the continuous dependent variable Hostility towards out-group of political elites (that is divided in two different variables Political opinion of against-referendum politicians and Political opinion of pro-referendum politicians) and the nominal independent variable Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia with two categories. 
      Hypotheses 8 and 9 used the same statistical measurement, the independent samples t-test but among the nominal and independent variable of Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia and the continuous and dependent variable Social distance towards out-group of individuals. In order to complement the results of the t-test a test of independence Chi-square was also run with a type of correlation Phi coefficient between the nominal variables Affective polarization out-group individuals and Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia, both dichotomous.
      Control variables were tested by Gender, Language and Political party, running two tests of independence Chi-square between the beforementioned control variables and Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia and Readers of online news outlets based on their provenience. For the control variable Age, it will be run a t-test between this one and Supporters leaning. 
      12.6 3.6 Validity and reliability 
      This section will explain how the researcher intended to achieve validity and reliability, within the measurements selected, to operationalize the variables and construct a valid and reliable tool to test adequately the concepts and hypotheses that shaped the research. Reliability and validity are central concerns for any researcher, although it is almost impossible to have perfect validity and reliability in a research, the goal is to be as accurate as possible and to have indicators that help to establish the credibility of findings (Neuman, 2014). 
      12.6.1 3.6.1 Validity
      Validity was addressed in the research by using, whenever it was possible, valid indicators and measurements of other researchers, while building the survey and by taking into consideration the singularities of the sample population. As it was mentioned in the operationalization section, almost all the questions, statements, answer categories and scales used in the questionnaire were adopted either from standard questions used in governmental barometers reports, such as the Eurobarometer of the European Commission or the Catalan Barometer of the Catalan Opinion Studies Center, or from previously validated researchers studying similar media phenomena or concepts as this thesis. This way, the concurrent validity, that it implies that the "measurement validity relies on a preexisting and already accepted measure to verify the indicator of a construct" and face validity that is the "judgment by the scientific community that the indicator really measures the construct" (Neuman, 2014, p.217) could be achieved. In some cases, the questions, statements, answer categories and scales had to be adapted and translated to the context of the Catalan referendum and the Catalan media landscape, making small linguistic changes or changing the options of the answer categories, but always maintaining and preserving the original sense of the measurements. 
      To achieve the most rigorous level of validity, the researcher had to take into account other issues due to the singularities that constituted the sample if one did not want to end up having biased findings. As it was mentioned in the sample design section, the survey questionnaire had to be designed in the Catalan and Spanish language, so the survey would not have explicit political leaning and to give the option to the respondents of choosing the language in which they felt more comfortable. Diligence and accuracy were used when translating the questions from English to Spanish and Catalan to by all means, achieve the same questions meaning in both surveys flow. The same order of questions/statements and the same answer categories and scales were used in both questionnaires. A neutral tone was used when writing the questionnaire, so the respondent would not feel biased or that their opinion was being repressed or underrepresented. As well, several errors or biases that were taken into consideration throughout the whole process of designing the questionnaire and were reported in the survey design section.
      The main concepts of the research, polarization and selective exposure were measured "using multiple indicators based on the idea that indicators of one construct will act alike or converge" (Neuman, 2014, p.217). Therefore, it was asked in different ways and using different questions the same concept, attitude and behavior to achieve convergent validity. 
      12.6.2 3.6.2. Reliability
      To assess reliability a factor analysis and a reliability analysis were run on the continuous variables to see if it was possible to correlate the items in different dimensions. 
      Opinion of politicians' scale. The scale is normally distributed. A principal component analysis (PCA) indicated that the 7 items which were 10-point Likert-scale form a one-dimension scale: using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1.00, KMO = .88, χ2 (N = 237, 21) = 1281. 70, p < .001. The resultant model explained 62. 5% of the variance in Opinion of the politicians. However, to answer hypothesis 7 it was needed to classify the items in two different dimensions, distinguishing the politicians between those that openly supported the celebration of the referendum and those who were against. The reliability analysis shows that items Xavier García Albiol, Inés Arrimadas, Miquel Iceta and Xavier Doménech have a good reliability, Cronbach's α .85 which is considered adequate (Field, 2005), but it was found that the original α of the item Xavier Doménech was higher than the Cronbach's α thus the item was excluded, and the level of internal consistency, consequently, increased to a Cronbach's α .94. The three items were put together in the category Rating of against referendum politicians since all expressed to be contrary to the celebration of the referendum and did not promote the mobilization of the citizenship. The reliability analysis shows that items Anna Gabriel, Carles Puigdemont, Oriol Junqueras and Xavier Domènech have a Cronbach's α .76 which can be considered as a moderate reliable scale. All the original α were lower thus creating the category Rating of pro-referendum politicians, that even if the politicians belong to different parties with different involvement regarding the celebration of the referendum, all of them openly were in favor of the right to vote for the self-determination of Catalonia.
      Trust upon online news outlets scale. The scale is normally distributed. PCA indicated that the 9 items which were 5-point Likert-scale based form three-dimensional scale. They were entered into factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (> 1.00), KMO = .76, χ2 (N = 178, 36) = 708.84, p <  .001. The resulting model explained 72.9% of the variance in Trust in online news outlets. The factors found were:
      Spanish online news outlets: The first factor included three items, El Mundo, ABC and La Razón all characterized for reporting in Spanish and having a conservative political leaning. 
      Catalan online news outlets: The second factor included three items all related to Catalan-based online news outlets and reporting in Catalan. This included TV3, Ara and Vilaweb.
      Neutral online news outlets. The third found included La Vanguardia, El Diario and El País which are considered as Spanish online news outlets but more balanced and neutral. 
      The scale has good reliability, the Cronbach's α for Spanish online news outlets is .82. and for Catalan online news outlets Cronbach's α is .90. Neutral online news outlets Cronbach's α is .51 therefore this variable scale will not be included in the analysis because the Cronbach's α is lower than .70. If the item El Diario would have been excluded the reliability of the scale would have improved to a Cronbach's α .65 but it would have been still considered not reliable enough. 
Table 1. Factor analysis and reliability for scale trust upon news outlets (N=178)
ItemSpanish online news outletsCatalan online news outletsNeutral online news outletsTrust upon ABC.87Trust upon La Razón .85Trust upon El Mundo.77Trust upon Ara.89Trust upon TV3.87Trust upon Vilaweb.85Trust upon La Vanguardia.75Trust upon El Diario.74Trust upon El País.58R².28.26.17Cronbach's α.82.90.51r ( p < .001)Eigenvalue3.591.831.11Note: Rotated with Varimax, factor loadings below 0.30 excluded
      Tendency Toward Congruent Selective Exposure (TECSE) scale (Tsfati, 2016). The scale is normally distributed. PCA indicates that the 5 items which were 5-point Likert-scale bases, together form a two-dimensional scale. The items were entered into factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (> 1.00), KMO = .68, χ2 (N = 234, 10) = 258.63, p <  .001. The resultant model explained 68% of the variance in tendency toward congruent selective exposure. The factors found were:
      Selective exposure. This factor included four (1,2,3 and 5) items, all related to whether someone exposes them self to like-minded news. Item number 4 was found in another factor but it was decided upon to not use it. The scale is moderately reliable, Cronbach's α for selective exposure is .75. 
      
      
      
      
















13 4. Results
This section presents the descriptive statistics of all the main variables involved in the results and findings of the research. Subsequently, the output of the tests used to answer the hypotheses are stated along with other complementary tests that help enhance and enrich the interpretation of the results obtained. Lastly, it is possible to find that the results are related to the control variables. 
      13.1 4.1 Descriptive Statistics
      13.1.1 4.1.1 Dependent variables
      Readership of online news outlets based on their provenience. The descriptive statistics show that the sample (N =226), checked more Catalan-based online news outlets (79.2%) during the 1st of October of 2017 to gather political news about what was happening that day than Madrid-based (20.8%) online news outlets. 
      
      Perception of online news outlets discourse. 
Table 2. Frequencies of the overall Perception of online news outlets discourse (N = 226)
Responses NResponses PercentPro-independence discourse45922.6%Neutral discourse34917.2%Pro-unitarism discourse83341.0%No opinion39319.3%Total2034100%
Table 3. Frequencies of Perception of online news outlets per item (N = 237)
Pro-independence discourseNeutral discoursePro-unitarism discourseNo opinionEl País2.2%8.4%68.1%21.2%El Mundo1.3%4.0%76.1%18.6%ABC0.4%3.5%78.8%17.3%La Razón 0.4%2.2%78.8%18.6%La Vanguardia5.3%34.1%40.7%19.9%El Diario4.4%31.0%24.3%40.3%TV358.0%37.6%0.4%4.0%Vilaweb65.9%12.4%0.0%21.7%Ara65.0%21.2%1.3%12.4%
      The overall discourse perception that has a higher percentage is pro-unitarism, since 41% of the sample considers that from the total number of online news outlets there is a higher amount that are perceived as having a pro-unitarism discourse in comparison with the other possible options. Looking in more detail at the frequencies per item, it is possible to observe how the online news outlets La Razón and ABC both have a higher perception of reporting news that favor the pro-unitarism discourse during the referendum followed by El Mundo and El País. The most neutral perceived online news outlet for the respondents is TV3 with 37.6%, although this outlet has a higher score in pro-independence discourse. Vilaweb and Ara are the outlets with a higher perception of having a pro-independence discourse. La Vanguardia, which is the only online news outlet that was argued to be the most balanced among the options, is perceived as having a pro-unitarism discourse (40.7%) among the sample. El Diario is the only item where the higher score is no opinion, but this can be due to it being a recent online news outlet and not having a printed version, therefore it could be considered to be the lesser known item among the options. 
      
      Social distance towards out-group of individuals. The frequency of respondents' feeling of having a close friend that supports a contrary political stance is that 2.7% would not feel comfortable at all, 11.6% not too comfortable, 23.6 % somewhat comfortable, and 61.3% very comfortable. Thus, the most common answer among the sample is that respondents would feel comfortable having a close friend with contrary political views than theirs regarding the referendum. These results will then be contrasted with other variables in the hypotheses results, but overall it is possible to say that most of the sample does not show animosity towards out-group individuals. 
      
      Affective polarization out-group individuals. 85.8% of respondents state that their support of one of the political positions on the referendum is because of what that stance defends, and 11.6% say it is because they are contrary to the other political stance. Again, this will later be contrasted among supporters' groups and other variables, but overall, most of the sample does not show hostility and affective polarization for out-group individuals.
      Hostility towards out-group of political elites. The descriptive statistic of respondents' rating each of the main political leaders in Catalonia based shows that the mean for pro-referendum politicians is higher (M = 7.09) than the one for politicians against-referendum (M = 2.34). The politicians with the highest rating of exceptionally unfavorable are Xavier García Albiol with 79.4% of responses, followed by Inés Arrimadas (73.8%).  Both politicians are from the category against-referendum. The politicians with the higher ratings of favorability are Carles Puigdemont with 22.9% of exceptionally favorable and Oriol Junqueras with 19.6%, both of whom are pro-referendum politicians. Thus, most of the sample has a higher favorable opinion of politicians that agreed to do the self-determination referendum and an unfavorable opinion of those who were against. 

      13.1.2 4.1.2 Independent variable
      Supporters leaning towards independence of Catalonia. The frequency of respondents' political leaning on the relationship that they considered should exist between Spain and Catalonia is that 69.3% of the sample say that Catalonia should be an independent state (pro-independence supporters) and 30.7% say it should remain inside of Spain (pro-unitarism supporters). Therefore, most of the sample would prefer that Catalonia became an independent country from Spain. Looking in more detail at frequencies within the stance of pro-unitarism supporters; 2.7% wants Catalonia to become a region of Spain which is a more centralized and restrictive political system than the current one; 9.7% want an autonomous community of Spain, the current political system; and 18.1% wants Catalonia to become a state inside a federal Spain. It is important to denote that most of pro-unitarism supporters in the sample, even if they want to remain inside of Spain, aim for a new territorial political system which is more decentralized than the current one. 
      13.1.3 4.1.3 Exploratory variables
      Selective exposure. The descriptive statistics show a mean of 2.20 and a standard deviation of 0.88 (N=226). These results indicate that most respondents affirm not having behaviors of selective media exposure when gathering information. Although, this will be contrasted later with other statistical measurements to analyze if there are other bound to selective exposure of likeminded media reinforcing one's beliefs.
      
      
      
      
      Trust upon online news outlets.
Table 4. Descriptive statistics of Trust upon online news outlets per item (N = 189)
NMinimumMaximumMeanStd. DeviationEl País2261.005.002.501.10El Mundo2261.005.001.871.02ABC2261.005.001.570.95La Razón 1901.005.001.260.59La Vanguardia2261.005.002.910.99El Diario1941.005.002.781.18TV32261.005.003.941.13Vilaweb2261.005.003.701.14Ara2261.005.003.691.12Valid N (listwise)189
      Looking at Table 4, it is possible to argue that a majority of respondents completely distrust La Razón, since it is the online news outlet with the lowest mean. ABC also has quite a low mean close to the scale category of complete distrust followed by El Mundo, all of them being Spanish-based online news outlets, thus indicating that the sample tends to completely distrust Spanish-based online news outlets. La Vanguardia, El Diario and El País have similar means, all in between the scale's categories of partial distrust and neither trust or distrust, which can mean that respondents have given scattered ratings, depending on their perception. TV3, Vilaweb and Ara have the highest means close to the scale category of partial trust, all belonging to the group of Catalan-based outlets. The descriptive statistics of this variable reinforces the assumption that the respondents of this thesis tend to trust Catalan-based (M = 3.78, SD = 1.03) online news outlets more than Spanish-based ones (M = 1.86,  SD = 0.86). These results will be complemented later with other statistical measurements that will enrich the analysis by adding more variables that might influence an individual's trust upon an online news outlet. 
      13.1.4 4.1.4 Control Variables
      Political Party. The frequency of respondents' shows that 34.1% of participants sympathize with the party of Esquerra Republicana, 19.5% with CUP, 15.9% with PdeCat, 9.7% with Catalunya en Comú Podem, 4.9% with Partit Socialista, 4% with other parties, 3.5% with Ciutadans, 1.3% with Partido Popular, and 6.6% with none. The parties with higher levels of sympathy are the ones that openly supported the stance of having a referendum and favored the vote for the independence of Catalonia. The parties with inferior ratings of sympathy are the ones that were against having a referendum (PSC, Ciutadans and Partido Popular). The party with the highest sympathy rate among the pro-unitarism parties is Catalunya en Comú Podem, the only party that openly supported the referendum but encouraged civilians to vote for remaining in Spain. 
      13.2 4.2 Hypotheses Tests
      I begin by testing hypotheses 1 and 2, positing that pro-unitarism supporters read more Madrid-based online news outlets than pro-independence citizens and pro-independence supporters read more Catalan-based online news outlets than pro-unitarism citizens. 
      A Chi-square test and a Phi association coefficient were conducted. The Chi-square test revealed that Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia is related to the Readership of online news outlets based on their provenience:
χ2  (N = 225, 1) = 43.70, p < .001. 
      Based on the Phi coefficient there is a moderate positive association between Supporters leaning and Readership of online news outlets based on their provenience, ϕ = .44,  p < .001. Crosstabulation indicates that 49.3% of pro-unitarism supporters read more Madrid-based online news outlets and 50.7% read more Catalan-based online news outlets. In the case of pro-independence supporters 8.8% read more Madrid-based online news outlets and 91.2% read more Catalan-based online news outlets. Therefore, it is possible to partially reject hypotheses 1, which says that pro-unitarism supporters read more Madrid-based online news outlets than pro-independence citizens, and accept hypotheses 2, which says pro-independence supporters read more Catalan-based online news outlets than pro-unitarism citizens. 
      To complement these results, the researcher explored if there could be a relation between a supporter's leanings and the level of trust based on the provenience of the online news outlet, since that is a more valuable indicator than just the quantity of online news outlets that a respondent reads. 
      A t-test showed that pro-independence supporters have significantly higher trust on Catalan online news outlets (M = 4.20, SD = 0.67) than pro-unitarism supporters (M = 2.83, SD = 1.10) , t(90.944) = - 9.54, p <.001. 
      A t-test showed that pro-unitarism supporters have significantly higher trust on Spanish online news outlets (M = 2.60, SD = 0.88) than pro-independence supporters (M = 1.89, SD =0.65) , t(94.708) = 5.98, p <.001. 
      These results show that even if pro-unitarism supporters read more Catalan-based online news outlets they give higher trust to the Madrid-based online news outlets in contrast with pro-independence supporters, which could be a sign that some degree of selective media exposure exists amongst this group of supporters too. The findings on pro-independence supporters verify the previous assumptions of having a more explicit and higher degree selective media exposure to Catalan-based online news outlets.
      To enrich the results, it was important to explore if there is a relationship between the degree of selective exposure of an individual and their political leaning on the self-determination referendum. Thus, the variable Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia was compared with the scale variable that measures the selective media exposure of each respondent.
      A t-test showed that pro-independence supporters have a slightly higher significant selective exposure (M = 2.30, SD = 0.87) than pro-unitarism supporters (M = 1.96, SD = 0.87), t(223) = - 2.74, p = .007. 
      The findings of the t-test were complemented with two additional t-tests due to selective media exposure being a complex phenomenon, and the results of the previous test show low means of selective media exposure among both groups of supporters. Thus, it was explored if there is a relation between the variables Trustworthiness of the news message of El País (Madrid-based online news outlet) and TV3 (Catalan-based online news outlet). What distinguishes these variables from the variable Selective exposure, is that in this case, respondents were not asked directly for the phenomenon of selective media exposure but instead they had to state if they trust the headlines of both outlets without knowing the source, which added new insights that help interpret whether supporters displayed selective media exposure behaviours. 
      The t-test shows that pro-unitarism supporters have a significant higher trustworthiness of the news message of El País, without knowing the source (M = 2.29, SD = 1.15) than pro-independence supporters (M = 1.35, SD =0.70), t(90.954) = 6.225, p <.001.
      When we look at the other online news outlet, the t-test shows that pro-independence supporters have a higher significant trustworthiness of the news message of TV3 without knowing the source (M = 3.70, SD = 0.52) than pro-unitarism supporters (M =2.83, SD = 1.15), t(81.009) = -6.046, p <.001. 
      Therefore, after analyzing all the different findings, it would be possible to conclude that both political stances display selective media exposure and polarized opinions on what media is trustworthy media for them. It is possible to see a relationship between being a pro-independence or pro-unitarism supporter and choosing and trusting certain online media outlets (Stroud, 2010). It is possible to interpret that individuals of both stances are more predisposed to seek news and trust like-minded online news outlets that reinforce and agree with their own self-preconceived political opinions (Stroud, 2010). Although, it is possible to argue that pro-independence supporters are more attached to Catalan-based online news outlets displaying some sort of higher selective media exposure than pro-unitarism supporters, thus partially rejecting hypothesis 1 and accepting hypothesis 2.  
      
      The next hypotheses that were tested are 3 and 4, positing La Vanguardia is considered by pro-independence supporters to be biased upon the news treatment of the Catalan referendum, and La Vanguardia is considered by pro-unitarism supporters to be biased upon the news treatment of the Catalan referendum. 
      A Chi-square test revealed that Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia is related to Perception of La Vanguardia discourse: 
χ2  (N = 180, 2) = 20.09, p <.001.
      Based on the gamma coefficient results G =.59, p <.001, there is a moderate positive relationship between Supporters leaning and Perception of La Vanguardia discourse. 
Table 5. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Perception of La Vanguardia discourse (N = 180)
Pro-unitarism supportersPro-independenceTotalPro-independence discourse15.7%3.1%6.7%Neutral discourse56.9%36.4%42.2%Pro-unitarism discourse27.5%60.5%51.1%Total100.0%100%100%
      Crosstabs shows that 60.5% of pro-independence supporters perceive La Vanguardia as having a more pro-unitarism discourse therefore, it is possible to accept the hypothesis that says that La Vanguardia is considered by pro-independence supporters to be biased upon the news treatment of the Catalan referendum, since a majority of pro-independence supporters do not perceive La Vanguardia as having a neutral discourse. Continuing with the crosstabulation results, 56.9% of pro-unitarism supporters perceive La Vanguardia discourse as being neutral, in contrast with 27.5% of supporters that perceive it as being more pro-unitarism. Therefore, hypotheses 4 that states that La Vanguardia is considered by pro-unitarism supporters to be biased upon the news treatment of the Catalan referendum gets partially rejected since most pro-unitarism supporters perceived La Vanguardia as having a neutral discourse when relating about the referendum political events. 
      To complement these findings, it was relevant to include Trustworthiness of the news message La Vanguardia in the analysis since that variable represents supporters trust based on an undisclosed article's headline, which provides stronger results of the degree of hostile media effect among stances. The t-test shows that pro-independence supporters have a higher significant trustworthiness of the news message of La Vanguardia (M = 3.50, SD = 0.59) than pro-unitarism supporters (M =3.15, SD = 0.85), t(99.134) = -3.01, p = .003. 
      Looking at if the headline of La Vanguardia caused discomfort, a t-test showed that pro-unitarism supporters have a higher discomfort caused by the news message of La Vanguardia (M = 1.77, SD = 0.96) than pro-independence supporters (M = 1.61, SD = 0.79), but this relation between discomfort caused by the news message of La Vanguardia and supporters leaning was found to be not significant t(221) = 1.28, p =.200. 
      Therefore, it is possible to interpret that even if pro-independence supporters perceived La Vanguardia as having a more pro-unitarism discourse, when they see an undisclosed headline of the outlet, they tend to trust it more than pro-unitarism supporters. These results bolster the argument that pro-independence supporters show a clearer hostile media effect, perceiving La Vanguardia as biased when the outlet is identified but trusting the message when the outlet is undisclosed (Reid, 2012). The contrary could be said about pro-unitarism supporters who perceive La Vanguardia as neutral when it is identified (maybe because of the historical prestige of the newspaper) but do not trust the news message when the outlet is undisclosed. It can be argued that this denotes some sort of undercover hostile media effect from part of unitarism supporters perceiving balanced content as biased when it is not labelled. It is possible to state the previous argument, but not that pro-unitarism supporters had a discomfort feeling towards the undisclosed headline of La Vanguardia since the t-test was not significant. Overall, the hypothesis La Vanguardia is considered by pro-unitarism supporters to be biased upon the news treatment of the Catalan referendum is still considered partially rejected since there is not enough clear evidence of the hostile media effect among pro-unitarism upon this online news outlet and the relationship between Supporters leaning and Discomfort caused by the news message of La Vanguardia was found not significant. However, it is relevant to point out that pro-unitarism supporters trust the online news outlet less when it is undisclosed.
      In order to test hostile media effect at a deeper level, the researcher asked the respondents to identify three undisclosed headlines. The three headlines belonged to El País, La Vanguardia and TV3, but two answer categories with a more partisan leaning were added in order to test hostile media effect among La Vanguardia headline and polarization of attitudes with El País and TV3. Thus, the 6 possible answer categories were: La Razón (Madrid-based online news outlet and very conservative), El País (Madrid-based online news outlet ), La Vanguardia (Madrid-based online news outlet and with prestige of balanced press), TV3 (Catalan-based online news outlets) and Vilaweb (Catalan-based online news outlets and considered partisan towards pro-independence discourses). The only significant Chi-square test found, was the one that asked for the identification of the headline of El País and not from La Vanguardia or TV3. Hostile media effect only applies to online news outlets that are supposed to be considered as balanced and moderate, and in this thesis, the only outlet included in that category was La Vanguardia (Newman et. al, 2018). However, the next results added new insights on polarization of attitudes and partisan media leaning regarding El País. 
      A Chi-square test revealed that the variable News outlet identification of El País, without being identified the source, is related to Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia:
χ2  (N = 225, 6) = 23.677, p = .001. 
Table 6. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Identification of the headline El País (N = 223)
Pro-unitarism supportersPro-independenceTotalLa Razón 51.5%58.7%56.5%La Vanguardia16.2%2.6%6.7%El País (correct answer)25.0%36.8%33.2%Vilaweb0.0%0.6%0.4%TV34.4%0.0%1.3%None of the previous ones2.9%1.3%1.8%Total100%100%100%
      If we compare, the previous results with what the respondents select as their perception upon the discourse of El País, a Chi-square test revealed that Perception El País discourse is related to Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia:
χ2  (N = 177, 2) = 36.66, p <.001.  
Table 7. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Perception of El País discourse (N = 117)
Pro-unitarism supportersPro-independenceTotalPro-independence discourse6.0%1.6%2.8%Neutral discourse32.2%2.4%10.7%Pro-unitarism discourse25.0%96.1%86.4%Total100%100%100%      
      The first Chi-square test results show that neither a majority of pro-unitarism nor pro-independence supporters identify the headline as being from El País correctly. Instead a majority of supporters identify it as being from La Razón, which was the most conservative online news outlet among the possible options. This reinforces the argument of polarized opinions among pro-independence supporters if we relate this answer with the ones given to their perception of El País discourse, being greatly perceived as having a pro-unitarism discourse in contrast with what pro-unitarism supporters stated. In their case, pro-unitarism supporters seem to perceive El País as a balanced and neutral press but when they see the undisclosed headline, they state in a majority that it belongs to La Razón. This can imply a polarization and radicalization of beliefs, since most of them did not feel discomfort with the headline thus agreeing with it and identify it consciously as being from a very partisan conservative online news outlet (Prior, 2013). These results can also entail that pro-unitarism supporters can clearly identify which are the like-minded online news outlets that follow pro-unitarism discourses, such as La Razón and El País, but are not able to differentiate the different editorial lines among them, since maybe, both report in a similar way about the referendum. Therefore, the theoretical argument of the press reporting in a more partisan and polarized degree about the referendum gets reinforced since most of the respondents in both stances did not identify the headline as belonging to El País (Prior, 2013). 
      
      If we look at the overall results regarding the perception in the discourses of the rest of online news outlets included in the thesis, it is possible to see how both stances of supporters, in a majority of cases, perceive the discourse of the online news outlets with the same leaning. Madrid-based online news outlets are largely perceived as having pro-unitarism discourses and Catalan-based online news outlets as having pro-independences discourses (see Table 1B Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia and Perception online news outlets discourse in Appendix B). 
      A Chi-square test revealed that Perception of the discourse El País is related to supporters leaning:
χ2  (N = 177, 2) = 36.66, p <.001. 
      A Chi-square test revealed that Perception of the discourse El Mundo  is related to supporters leaning:
χ2  (N = 183, 2) = 14.33, p = .001. 
      A Chi-square test revealed that Perception of the discourse ABC  is related to supporters leaning:
χ2  (N = 186, 2) = 11.93, p = .003. 
      A Chi-square test revealed that Perception of the discourse La Razón  is related to supporters leaning:
χ2  (N = 183, 2) = 15.22, p < .001. 
      A Chi-square test revealed that Perception of the discourse El Diario is not related to supporters leaning:
χ2  (N = 134, 2) = 5.28, p =.071. 
      A Chi-square test revealed that Perception of the discourse TV3 is related to supporters leaning:
χ2  (N = 216, 2) = 25.22, p < .001. 
      A Chi-square test revealed that Perception of the discourse El Vilaweb is not related to supporters leaning:
χ2  (N = 176, 1) = 1.44, p =.231. 
      A Chi-square test revealed that Perception of the discourse TV3 is related to supporters leaning:
χ2  (N = 197, 2) = 10.12, p = .006. 
      The overall results of the Chi-square tests show that there are significant relationships between Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia and the Perception of online news outlets discourse with all the items except for El Diario and Vilaweb. Again, it is possible to state that the selective media exposure phenomenon is clearer and seen in a higher degree among pro-independence supporters that perceive TV3 as having a neutral discourse, but when portrayed by the Digital News Report it is seen as focusing too much in the pro-independence process (Neuman, 2018). As it was argued by Feldman (2018), the polarization of the media and its audiences tends to create stronger sides among a population, leading to misinformed citizens and erasing moderate positions, as is seen in the case of pro-independence supporters with their distorted perceptions about the media discourses of La Vanguardia and TV3. 
      
      To test hypotheses 5 and 6, positing most supporters of the independence of Catalonia are hostile towards pro-unitarism supporters and most supporters of the pro-unitarism of Catalonia are hostile towards pro-independence supporters, two one-sample t-tests were run, one for each supporters leanings, selecting first only the pro-independence supporters and relate it to Social distance towards out-group of individuals and in second place, selecting only the pro-unitarism supporters and testing the relationship between the same variable. 
      A t-test with a test value of 2.5 showed a significant relationship between pro-unitarism supporters and Social distance towards out-group of individuals, (M = 3.48, SD = 0.87), t(67) = 9.314 , p < .001.
      A t-test with a test value of 2.5 showed a significant relationship between pro-independence supporters and Social distance towards out-group of individuals, (M = 3.43, SD = 0.77), t(154) = 15.013 , p < .001.
      The test value of 2.5 indicates the minimum rating that a respondent had to give in order to not be considered hostile towards the out-group of individuals, since the scale categories were 1 not being comfortable at all with having a close friend supporting a contrary stance to mine, 2 not too comfortable, 3 somewhat comfortable and 4 very comfortable, thus considering that above 2.5 one is not hostile. The results show that among both political leanings, a majority of respondents do not show animosity in having a close friend supporting a contrary stance to theirs, hence rejecting both hypotheses that were stating that they would display hostility towards the contrary stance of individuals. 
      For complementing the results, two Chi-square goodness of fit test using a 50% proportion were performed between the variable Affective polarization towards out-group individuals and pro-unitarism and pro-independence supporters. A Chi-square test revealed that the proportion of pro-unitarism supporters that defend their position because they are against the other side is significantly different from 50%: 
 χ2  (N = 63, 1) = 17.29, p < .001. 
      A Chi-square test revealed that the proportion of pro-independence supporters that defend their position because they are against the other side is significantly different from 50%:   
χ2  (N = 156, 1) = 115.10, p < .001. 
      The frequencies of pro-unitarism supporters show how 48 respondents state being pro-unitarism because of what that stance defends, in contrast to 15 respondents that state because they are contrary to the other stance. The expected N was 31.5. In the case of pro-independence supporters' frequencies 145 individuals state defending the independence of Catalonia because of what that stance defends in contrast to 11 respondents that say doing it because they are contrary to the other stance. In this case the expected N was 78.0.
Table 8. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Affective polarization towards out-group individuals (N = 219)
Pro-unitarism supportersPro-independence supportersTotalFor what my stance defends76.2%92.9%88.8%Because I'm contrary to the other stance23.8%7.1%12.0%Total100%100%100%       These results reinforce the rejection of hypotheses 5 and 6, since a majority of respondents, on both stances, defend that they are not hostile towards the opposite stance and not show animosity against individuals that think contrary to them (Garrett et al., 2014). Nevertheless, when comparing both groups of supporters in Table 8, is noticeable that almost one quarter of the pro-unitarism supporters state supporting that stance because they are against pro-independence supporters which implies that there is a higher effect of affective polarization among the group of pro-unitarism supporters than among pro-independence supporters, although not in a sufficient degree to accept the hypothesis. 
      
      To test hypothesis 7, positing there is a relationship between a supporter's political leaning towards the independence of Catalonia and being hostile towards the out-group of political elites, two t-tests for independent means were run, one for each out-group of politicians.
      A t-test showed that pro-independence supporters have a higher significant favorable opinion towards pro-referendum politicians (M = 8.19, SD = 1.39) than pro-unitarism supporters (M = 4.65, SD = 2.57), t(83.837) = - 10.579, p < .001. 
      The other t-test showed that pro-unitarism supporters have a significantly higher favorable opinion towards against-referendum politicians (M = 3.50, SD = 2.20) than pro-independence supporters (M = 0.94, SD = 8.55) , t(79.754) = 6.153, p < .001. 
      Therefore, it is possible to accept hypotheses 7, since it is possible to see a relationship between being a pro-unitarism supporter and having a much higher favorable opinion towards against-referendum politicians and a very unfavorable opinion towards the group of politicians that are contrary to that belief, in this case pro-referendum politicians (Banda & Cluverius, 2018). This relationship also happens with the contrary stance. Pro-independence supporters have a much higher favorable opinion towards pro-referendum politicians than pro-unitarism supporters, also rating with unfavorable values against-referendum politicians. This denotes again the polarization of opinions among Catalan citizens and the increasing hostility attitude towards out-group political elites. As it was argued in the theoretical framework, affective polarization can produce severe consequences in a democratic society. This affective polarization towards pro-referendum political elites, that moreover are ruling in coalition in the Catalan Parliament, can fragment the society and increase mass polarization in the citizenship level, since some are very favorable with the politicians ruling (pro-independence supporters) and others are very unfavorable (Banda & Cluverius, 2018). The same could be said with the unfavorable opinion towards against-referendum politicians that even if they do not have the majority in the Catalan Parliament, they still have a big representation of parliaments. If we look at the national level, against-referendum parties have a wider majority in the Spanish Parliament, which can explain the difficult relationship between pro-referendum and against-referendum political elites. 
      
      To test hypotheses 8 and 9, positing most readers of Catalan-based online news outlets are hostile towards pro-unitarism supporters and most readers of Madrid-based online news outlets are hostile towards pro-independence supporters, a t-test for independent means was run between the variables Readership of online news outlets based on their provenience and Social distance towards out-group individuals.
       The t-test shows that readers of Madrid-based online news outlet (M = 3.13, SD = 1.00) have a slightly higher significant level of social distance towards out-group individuals than readers of Catalan-based online news outlets (M = 3.53, SD = 0.72), t(57.732) = - 3.07, p = .002. For complementing these results, a Chi-square test and a Phi association coefficient were performed between Readership of online news outlets based on their provenience and Affective polarization towards out-group of individuals. A Chi-square test revealed that readers of online news outlets based on their provenience is related to hostility towards out-group of individuals:
χ2  (N = 219, 1) = 15.67, p < .001. 
      Based on the Phi coefficient there is a negative association between readers of online news outlets based on their provenience and hostility towards out-group of individuals, ϕ = -.27, p < .001. 
Table 9. Crosstabulation of Readership of online news outlets based on their provenience and Affective polarization towards out-group individuals (N = 219)
Readers of Madrid-based online news outletsReaders of Catalan-based online news outletsTotalFor what my stance defends71.1%92.5%88.1%Because I'm contrary to the other stance28.9%7.5%11.9%Total100%100%100%
      The results show that hypotheses 8 and 9 can be rejected since neither Madrid-based or Catalan-based readers show animosity towards individuals of the contrary stance. Since hypotheses 5 and 6 also got rejected it is possible to conclude that neither pro-unitarism/pro-independence supporters or Madrid-based/Catalan-based readers are hostile towards individuals of the out-group. However, it is possible to see again, how in this case readers of Madrid-based online news outlets display a higher level of affective polarization toward out-group individuals than readers of Catalan-based online news outlets. 
      
      Lastly, it was important to explore if there is a connection between having a certain political leaning and expressing discomfort towards the way of reporting about the referendum among one Madrid-based online news outlet (El País) and one Catalan-based online news outlet (TV3). To explore this line of argumentation, respondents were asked to rank their level of discomfort to real headlines from the 1st of October of 2017 without them knowing the source of the outlet. 
      The t-test showed that pro-independence supporters have a significant higher discomfort caused by the news message of El País, without knowing the source (M = 3.50, SD = 0.75) than pro-unitarism supporters (M = 2.69, SD = 1.11) , t(96.161) = -5.513, p <.001. And if we look at the Catalan-based online news outlet, the t-test shows that pro-unitarism supporters have a higher significant discomfort caused by the news message of TV3, without knowing the source (M = 2.10, SD = 1.06) than pro-independence supporters (M =1.38, SD = 0.72), t(97.624) = 5.122, p <.001. 
      It is not possible to claim that the selective exposure to likeminded media causes supporters of both stances to become more hostile towards dissimilar media, but there is certainly a connection between both variables, since respondents, without knowing the source of the online news outlets continue supporting the like-minded media to their stances and expressing discomfort to the dissimilar media. Hence, pro-unitarism supporters had less discomfort with the news message of El País when reporting about the referendum because it is a Madrid-based online news supposedly "joining the main Spanish political parties in defending the legal status quo" as pointed out by Newman et al. (2018, p.102) in the Digital News Report 2018. On the contrary pro-independence supporters show a higher mean of discomfort by the news message of El País, between the range of it annoys me a little bit (3) and extremely annoys me (4). Looking at the level of discomfort caused by TV3 then is possible to see that pro-independence supporters are in a greater way not annoyed at all with the news message of TV3 (a Catalan-based online news outlet), even without knowing the source of the news, because again, it is supposedly spreading a more pro-independence discourse in their way of reporting about the referendum. In the case of pro-unitarism supporters they express less discomfort with the news messages of TV3 if we compared the means with the ones of El País and pro-independence supporters. 
      These last results add to the previous ones, the fact that pro-independence supporters express higher discomfort to online media with pro-unitarism discourses than pro-unitarism supporters to online media with pro-independence discourses. However, is important to highlight that this discomfort showed in media with dissimilar discourses does not seem to be translated to hostility or animosity towards individuals of contrary stances but does towards political elites. 
      13.3 4.3 Control variables tests
      13.3.1 4.3.1 Language
      A Chi-square test revealed that language is related to supporters leaning:
χ2  (N = 225, 1) = 55.74, p < .001. 
      Based on the Phi coefficient there is a large positive correlation between language and supporters leaning, ϕ = .50, p < .001. 
Table 10. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Language (N = 225)
Pro-unitarism supportersPro-independence supportersTotalSpanish44.9%4.5%16.9%Catalan55.1%95.5%83.1%Total100%100%100%      The Crosstabulation shows that 44.9% of pro-unitarism supporters preferred the Spanish language to do the survey and 55.1% Catalan. But if we look in more detail into the three possible categories of pro-unitarism, 100% of people who wants Catalonia to be a region of Spain choose Spanish as language, 77.3% of those wanting Catalonia to be an autonomous community of Spain preferred Spanish and 19.5% of those who want Catalonia to be a state inside of a federal Spain choose Spanish. Therefore, it can be argued that the Spanish language is more present in extreme supporters of the unitarism movement and less present with the unitarism supporters that stand for remaining in Spain but with a more open federal territorial system. If we look at the language preference of the other stance, 4.5% of pro-independence supporters preferred to do the survey in Spanish and 95.5% in Catalan, which shows a clearer and stronger connection between Catalan language and pro-independence. 
Table 11. Crosstabulation of Types of relationship with Spain and Language (N = 225)
A region of SpainAn Autonomous community of SpainA state inside a federal SpainAn independent stateTotalSpanish100.0%77.3%19.5%4.5%16.9%Catalan0.0%22.7%80.5%95.5%83.1%Total100%100%100%100%100%      Overall, it is possible to acknowledge how language can become a political tool that distinguishes supporters and differentiates them. The more polarized and extreme a supporter is, the less willing they are to speak the language of the out-group, even if they have the knowledge to speak it and use it.
      A Chi-square test revealed that Language is related to Readers of online news outlets based on their provenience:
χ2  (N = 226, 1) = 49.77, p < .001. 
      Based on the Phi coefficient there is a moderate positive association between Language and Readers of online news outlets based on their provenience, ϕ = .47, p < .001. 
Table 12. Crosstabulation of Readers of online news outlets based on their provenience and Language (N = 225)
Readers of Madrid-based online news outletsReaders of Catalan-based online news outletsTotalSpanish51.1%7.8%16.8%Catalan48.9%92.2%83.2%Total100%100%100%      The Crosstabulation shows similar results to the ones obtained between language preference and supporters leaning had. 51.1% of readers of Madrid-based preferred the Spanish language to do the survey and 48.9% Catalan. The contrary happens with readers of Catalan-based outlets, 7.8% preferred to do the survey in Spanish and 92.2%% in Catalan. This implies that the variables Supporters leaning, and Readership of online news outlets based on their provenience have the same tendency and display similar percentages when relating them to Language preference. Thus, pro-unitarism supporters and readers of Madrid-based online news outlets have similar results and pro-independence supporters and readers of Catalan-based online news outlets do too. 
      13.3.2 4.3.2 Political party
      A Chi-square test revealed that sympathy to a political party is related to supporters leaning towards the relationship between Spain and Catalonia:
χ2  (N = 225, 8) = 127.09, p < .001. 
Table 13. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Political party (N = 225)
Pro-unitarism supportersPro-independence supportersTotalPartido Popular4.3%0.0%1.3%Esquerra Republicana13.0%43.6%34.2%Partit Socialista14.5%0.6%4.9%Ciutadans11.6%0.0%3.6%CUP7.2%25.0%19.6%PdeCat2.9%21.8%16.0%Catalunya en Comú Podem29.0%1.3%9.8%Other1.4%5.1%4.0%None15.9%2.6%6.7%Total100%100%100%
      A Chi-square test revealed that sympathy for a political party is related to readers of online news outlets based on their provenience:
χ2  (N = 226, 9) = 55.221, p < .001. 
Table 14. Crosstabulation of Readership of online news outlets based on their provenience and Political party (N = 225)
Readers of Madrid-based online news outletsReaders of Catalan-based online news outletsTotalPartido Popular6.4%0.0%1.3%Esquerra Republicana17.0%38.8%34.2%Partit Socialista14.9%2.2%4.9%Ciutadans12.8%1.1%3.6%CUP14.9%20.8%19.6%PdeCat4.3%19.1%16.0%Catalunya en Comú Podem19.1%7.3%9.8%Other2.1%4.5%4.0%None8.5%6.2%6.7%Total100%100%100%
      Thus, it is possible to see a connection between a supporters' leaning, the readership of online news outlets based on their provenience, and having sympathy for a political party. These three variables show similar results; if someone is a pro-unitarism supporter tend to be also a Madrid-based reader of online news outlets and having more sympathy to pro-unitarism political forces. Same results in the opposite direction for respondents that are pro-independence supporters. 
      13.3.3 4.3.3 Age
      A t-test shows that there is no significant relation between Age and pro-independence supporters (M = 46.39, SD = 13.20) and pro-unitarism supporters (M = 45.81, SD = 13.66), t(212) = -.29, p = .773.
      Thus, the age of the respondents does not condition one's political leaning towards the independence of Catalonia.
      13.3.4 4.3.4 Gender
      A Chi-square test revealed that Gender is not related to Supporters leaning towards the independence of Catalonia:
χ2  (N = 225, 2) = 1.19, p = .554. 
      A Chi-square test revealed that Gender is not related to Readers of online news outlets based on their provenience:
χ2  (N = 226, 2) = 5.23, p = .073. 
      Thus, there is not a relation between being male or female and supporting one of the political stances as well as being a reader of Madrid-based or Catalan-based online news outlets. 
      13.4 4.4 Discussion
      In this section, the interpretation of the researcher will be argued based on the results obtained after the analysis and the rejection and acceptance of the hypotheses. 
      Overall, the results show a high polarization on the trust given to the online news outlets depending on whether they are Catalan-based or Spanish-based and if an individual is a pro-independence or pro-unitarism supporter. Regarding this assumption, as Hallin and Mancini (2016) argued, Spain has always historically had a Polarized Pluralistic media system in which media has always tended to have a partisan leaning and connections with the ruling governments. This fact is well known between the citizens and it is common knowledge which outlets are more conservative or more leftist than others, which is also visible in the homogeneity within the answers giving to the discourse perception of the online news outlets among supporters of both stances. What is more unexpected is that it is possible to see that some of the news outlets that were thought to be balanced and neutral, such as El País, El Mundo, TV3, La Vanguardia, are losing this notion among the citizenship, encouraging the partisan selective media exposure of individuals. One of the main problems in the Catalan political conflict is the lack of neutral voices, as both stances have become more polarized from each other and the media has taken sides as well instead of remaining balanced. That it is why is not surprising that pro-independence supporters tend to read more Catalan-based online news outlets and give them more trust since many of the Spanish-based online news outlets have increased their tones and their partisan leanings, hardening their discourses and portraying Catalan political events in a way that is favorable for pro-unitarism politics. What can be more threatening for democratic politics is the moderate hostile media effect towards La Vanguardia that pro-independence supporters show in the results. The fact that they perceive the online news outlet as having a pro-unitarism discourse but then trusting it when they see an undisclosed headline, clearly shows that pro-independence supporters are having a biased preconception of La Vanguardia, thus discrediting its reports. 
      Pro-unitarism supporters do not show such a strong selective media exposure or hostile media effect but, it is also important to consider that the pro-unitarism supporters selected for the thesis live in Catalonia and have ties with the region, and perhaps different results could have been found with a broader Spanish population of pro-unitarism supporters. On the national level, pro-unitarism supporters are more radical and contrary to any referendum or autonomy for Catalonia. The positive aspect of all of this is that the four hypotheses concerning affective polarization towards out-group of individuals got rejected, meaning that even if there is a partisan leaning in the media and selective exposure among Catalan citizens with polarized opinions of what is trustworthy press, these still do not display, in a meaningful way, affective polarization towards out-group individuals. This is a relevant note since it implies that there are still spaces involving dialogue, toleration towards discrepant opinions and comprehension among the Catalan society. 









14 5. Conclusion
This section oﬀers a conclusion of the ﬁndings of the study, answering the research question, giving an explanation of the limitations that the thesis faced and recommendations for future research in this field of study.
      14.1 5.1 Conclusion and implications of the research
      This thesis has studied and researched the online media choices of news outlets among Catalan citizens, focusing on the period when the self-determination referendum took place in Catalonia. Using a questionnaire as research method, respondents had to answer a series of questions about their political leaning, online media consumption, perception upon a series of online news outlets discourses and trust given to them in order to explore if Catalans were subject to selective media exposure and polarization of attitudes among the two different political stances. A series of Chi-square tests, Phi association coefficients, Crosstabulation and t-test for independent means and one-sample t-test were used to measure the phenomena of selective media exposure, polarization of attitudes, hostile media effect and affective polarization. 
       The findings of the thesis show how pro-independence supporters display a higher selective media exposure towards Catalan-based online news outlets than pro-unitarism supporters towards Spanish-based online news outlets. Although when it comes to their opinion on which online media outlets are more trustworthy, both political stances show polarized attitudes, always favoring the like-minded online media of each stance and distrusting the dissimilar online media. The supporters of the independence show a higher level of trust to Catalan-based online news outlets almost stating a complete trust as scale category if we look at the mean number of the Chi-square test, while pro-unitarism supporters even if they trust more Spanish-based online news outlets their level of trust is not as high, the mean number is closer to scale answer category of neither trust or distrust.
      Bringing back to the analysis the research question stating to what extent does selective media exposure relate to polarized attitudes in Catalan society regarding the Catalan referendum, it is now possible to answer it arguing that there is a relationship between having a higher polarized attitude and having a higher level of selective media exposure to political concordant online media. The nature of this relationship demonstrates that individuals with a higher polarized attitude are trusting more the media organizations following like-minded political stance while they show untrustworthiness towards politically dissimilar media organizations. Moreover, according to the research results, the stance of pro-independence supporters displayed a higher selective media exposure towards Catalan-based online news outlets than pro-unitarism supporters towards Spanish-based online news outlets. This entailed that pro-independence supporters showed a higher level of trust in Catalan-based online media than pro-unitarism supporters towards Spanish-based online media. 
      This argument was built after running several tests among different variables. The results obtained show that respondents, even without knowing the source of the online news outlet, still trusted more what was being reported by the like-minded media of each political stance and experiencing discomfort with the way that dissimilar online media reported the events of the referendum. Pro-unitarism supporters also display this behavior and opinion with Spanish-based online news outlets, however not in such strong way as pro-independence supporters thus stating that because pro-independence supporters have a higher selective media exposure and a hostile media effect than pro-unitarism supporters that can be related to their higher trust on Catalan-based online news outlets and higher discomfort to dissimilar online media. 
      It was not found affective polarization towards out-group individuals but yes affective polarization towards the political elites, which contributes to the existence of polarized attitudes among the Catalan society creating stronger differences among stances and opinion in relation to political elites. Again, the ratings of unfavourability were higher among pro-independence supporters towards against-referendum politicians that the ratings of unfavourability of pro-unitarism supporters towards pro-referendum politicians. 
      These findings contribute to add new literature to the concepts of selective media exposure and polarization of attitudes and corroborate some of the main arguments done by other academics in the field of media and political studies such as the relation between the polarization of attitudes and the partisan selective media exposure to like-minded media (Levendunsky, 2013). This thesis is only small-scale research regarding the Catalan referendum but can encourage other researchers to continue this line of investigation and explore in a broader and deeper level the media phenomena's in political conflicts with high emotional loadings and mediatic coverage. The results show in a moderate level how supporters have hardened their beliefs and strengthened their differences. The findings of this thesis could be interpreted as a warning, implying that this situation can get aggravated if the political conflict persists and a political solution is not found among the Catalan and Spanish governments. The continuous exposure to concordant media and the discredit of dissimilar media can produce a non-reconstituable fracture among the Catalan and Spanish society in the long run, by threatening democratic politics and creating hostility and animosity between individuals of different political leanings. Polarization and selective media exposure can also bring hostile media effect which can demise the moderate opinions, making individuals perceive as biased what is neutral information. Ultimately, these media phenomena can weaken an individual's reasoning in politics thus the relevance of continue researching this political conflict using a media approach. The findings contribute to the citizenship by portraying a slightly polarized Catalan society, attach to certain media preferences reinforcing one's beliefs, that hold a partisan posture depending on the political parallelism of the outlet. This situation enhances the need for continuing studying and closely following these media phenomena in order to not compromise more the democratic and social role of media in Spain and to not contribute in the creation of disinformed and manipulated individuals. 
      14.2 5.2 Limitations of the research
      Regarding the limitations that the thesis research faced, the most relevant one is the fact of not conducting a probabilistic sample procedure during the sampling process. This entailed that there was not an equally distributed number of pro-independence supporters and pro-unitarism supporters. The sample had a higher number of participants supporting the independence of Catalonia than any other of the possible relationships with Spain which might have unbalanced some of the results, since pro-independence supporters' findings end up being stronger that the ones regarding pro-unitarism supporters. Moreover, if we look at the three possible political leanings that determined if an individual was a pro-unitarism supporter, it is possible to acknowledge how there are more respondents that want Catalonia to be a federal state inside of Spain than an Autonomous community or a region of Spain, which is not a representative stratified numerical quota of the actual political sensibilities within the Catalan society. The researcher faced limitations when accessing more right-winging pro-unitarism supporters since they turned out to be more inaccessible and less predisposed to participate voluntarily. Individuals holding this political position end up being a minority within the sample. It is possible to see these unbalanced quotas in the frequency's statistics of Political party in where only 1.3% of respondents have sympathy for the party Ciutadans when is actually the third political force leading the opposition in the Catalan Parliament. On the other side, CUP is overrepresented within the number of pro-independence supporters, since 19.5% of respondent sympathizes with the party but is the fifth political force in the Catalan Parliament. This party defines itself as extreme left and pro-independence which may have influenced some of the pro-independence supporter's results and findings.
      Another factor to take into consideration is having unbalanced stratified quotas within the demographic variables too, thus having more women than men as respondents, and uneven respondents in the age categories. 
      Having to build a questionnaire that had to be completed in less than 10 minutes also could be considered as another limitation that conditioned the thesis, since the number and type of questions and answer categories had to be adapted to encourage the respondents to finalize the survey. This implied that the questionnaire could have been built in a more complex way, asking more in-depth questions but due to the time conditioned, it was built going straight to the main questions regarding the hypotheses and research question leaving out some nuances that could have brought deeper insights of the sample. 
      If the researcher would have had accessed to more resources, the thesis research could have been expanded to use a qualitative method to complement the findings obtained with the survey. This way, using focus group or interviews with pro-independence and pro-unitarism supporters, it would have been possible to obtained more in-depth opinions, only reachable using a qualitative method and that would have been relevant for the purpose of this thesis since an individual's political opinion is a multi-characteristic aspect to study. 
      14.3 5.3 Future research
      I proposed to future researchers interested in the media phenomena of selective media exposure and polarization of attitudes regarding the Catalan referendum to study the political event with a broader sample of respondents, including Spanish citizens and/or European citizens and an extended list of items, including more Spanish and European media.
       Since the Catalan referendum has highly affected the politics in Spain, it is relevant to study how the rest of Spanish citizens followed the event and whether their political opinions have been polarized because of that. During the last Spanish elections of April 2019, it was possible to see how the extreme right-wing party Vox enter for the first into the Spanish Parliament with 24 seats. This is an unprecedented situation since the reestablishment of democracy in Spain. In the electoral program of Vox were included measures such as the abolishment of the Autonomías political system, going back to a regional system with less power for the Autonomies, among many other controversial political measurements (Rus & Utrero, 2019). Some political scientists attributed these increased of the extreme right among Spanish citizens due to the political crisis in Catalonia thus the relevance in study it in more depth to analyze the impact that has had the Catalan referendum on the citizens opinions regarding politics and whether these opinions have been polarized since the political event (García, 2018). 
      This research focused on the media exposure of Catalan citizens mainly during the events of the referendum, but it is also pertinent to continue to study the follow up political events developed after the referendum. There has been also an extensive media coverage of the Catalan politicians involved in the organization of the referendum that have been in custody since November 2017 and now are been judged in the High Spanish Court or the exile of the former president of 'La Generalitat', Carles Puigdemont to Brussels in where the High Tribunals of that country decided not to put him in custody, not judge him for rebellion or high treason and not extradited to Spain, which has caused also a diplomatic crisis among the countries.  
      On the other hand, it is also relevant to study the media coverage that the Catalan referendum received from the international media, especially networks and newspapers from Europe, to compare how Spain's covered the event and how other European countries did, comparing as well the political opinions of citizens in different countries. This comparison with outside media, would allow to study if the Spanish citizens are having (or not) a more selective media exposure due to the way of reporting of the news outlets and to explore if the media have been reporting in an unbalanced or biased way. The internationalization of the Catalan political conflict has been always important for the pro-independence politicians that promoted the referendum, since they stand that the European law allows the celebration of self-determination referendums thus focusing in having international attention to validate this event. By comparing the Spanish media coverage with other European countries, it could be studied which role and discourse have taken the European Union towards the political conflict, whether remaining neutral or supporting one of the political stances.  
     
     





15 References
ABC. (2017). Catalan referendum: Spanish police move to enforce vote ban as supporters occupy schools. Retrieved from: https://www.ABC.net.au/news/2017-10-01/spanish-police-move-to-enforce-ban-on-catalan-vote/9005068
Arceneaux, K. & Martin J. (2013). Changing Minds or Changing Channels?, University of Chicago Press, USA.
Banda, K., & Cluverius, J. (2018). Elite polarization, party extremity, and affective polarization. Electoral Studies, 56, 90-101. doi:10.1016/j.electstud.2018.09.009
Battaglia, M. (2011). Convenience Sampling. In P. Lavrakas, Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods (p. 149). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, Inc.
Baumgartner, F. R.  & Chaqués Bonafont, L. (2015) All News is Bad News: Newspaper Coverage of Political Parties in Spain, Political Communication, 32:2, 268-291. doi: 10.1080/10584609.2014.919974
BBC Mundo. (2015). Cataluña: los ciudadanos que se sienten huérfanos ante las cruciales elecciones de este domingo [Catalonia: Citizens that feel orphans in the evento of the crucial elections of this Sunday]. Retrieved from: https://www.bbc.com/mundo/noticias/2015/09/150925_espana_cataluna_elecciones_independencia_testimonios_jg
Brader, T., Valentino, N., & Suhay, E. (2008). What Triggers Public Opposition to Immigration? Anxiety, Group Cues, and Immigration Threat. American Journal Of Political Science, 52(4), 959-978. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-5907.2008.00353.x
Centre d'Estudis d'Opinió (2018). Baròmetre d'opinió política. [Barometer of political opinion] Barcelona, Spain: Institut d'estadística de Catalunya. Retrieved from: http://upceo.ceo.gencat.cat/wsceop/6868/Taules%20estad%C3%ADstiques%20-908.pdf
Clasificación Mundial 2018 de la Libertad de Prensa | El odio al periodismo amenaza las democracias: Reporteros Sin Fronteras. [Global classification of the freedom of press 2018. The hate towards journalism threatens democracies] (2018). Retrieved from https://www.rsf-es.org/news/clasificacion-mundial-2018-de-la-libertad-de-prensa-el-odio-al-periodismo-amenaza-las-democracias/
Crigler, A. & Hevron, P. (2017). Affect and Political Choice. The Oxford handbook of political communication.
De Leeuw, E., Hox, J., & Dillman, D. (2008). The cornerstones of survey research. In E. De Leeuw, J. Hox & D. Dillman, International handbook of survey methodology. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
DiMaggio, P., Evans, J., & Bryson, B. (1996). Have American's Social Attitudes Become More Polarized?. American Journal Of Sociology, 102(3), 690-755. doi: 10.1086/230995
Druckman, J., & Levendusky, M. (2018). What Do We Measure When We Measure Affective Partisanship?. Institute for Policy Research.
European Commission, Directorate-General for Communication. (2013). Media use in the European Union (Standard Eurobarometer 80).
Faris, R., Roberts, H., Etling, B., Bourassa, N., Zuckerman, E., & Benkler, Y. (2017). Partisanship, Propaganda, and Disinformation: Online Media and the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election. Berkman Klein Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University. Retrieved from http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:33759251
Feldman, L. (2018). The Hostile Media Effect. The Oxford Handbook of Political Communication. Oxford University Press.
Field, A. (2005). Discovering statistics using SPSS (2nd ed.). London: Sage Publications.
García, J. (2018). Las querellas por el 'procés' que catapultaron a Vox. [The grievance procedure that catapulted Vox]. El País. Retrieved from: https://elpais.com/ccaa/2018/12/04/catalunya/1543938174_329485.html
Garrett, R., Gvirsman, S., Johnson, B., Tsfati, Y., Neo, R., & Dal, A. (2014). Implications of Pro- and Counterattitudinal Information Exposure for Affective Polarization. Human Communication Research, 40(3), 309-332. doi: 10.1111/hcre.12028
Generalitat de Catalunya. (2011). Acord marc dels serveis de gestió i inserció de publicitat institucional en els mitjans de comunicación. [Agreement of the services framework of management and advertisement placement] Expedient número 2011010. Retrieved from: http://www.vozbcn.com/figura/2012/01/20120101subvencion.jpg 
Gil, T. (2017). ¿Qué pasa con la independencia de Cataluña tras el dividido resultado de las elecciones?. BBC Mundo. Retrieved from: https://www.bbc.com/mundo/noticias-internacional-42448892
Giner-Sorolla, R., & Chaiken, S. (1994). The causes of hostile media judgements. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 30, 165-180.
Gunther, A., & Schmitt, K. (2004). Mapping Boundaries of the Hostile Media Effect. Journal Of Communication, 54(1), 55-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2004.tb02613.x
Hall, J. (2011). Cross-Sectional Survey Design. In P. Lavrakas, Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Hallin, D. C., & Mancini, P. (2004). Comparing media systems: Three models of media and politics. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Hallin, D., & Mancini, P. (2016). Ten Years After Comparing Media Systems: What Have We Learned?. Political Communication, 34(2), 155-171. doi: 10.1080/10584609.2016.1233158
Iyengar, S., & Hahn, K. (2009). Red media, blue media: Evidence of ideological selectivity in media use. Journal of Communication, 59(1), 19-19. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.2008.01402.x
Iyengar, S., Sood, G., & Lelkes,Y. (2012).Affect, not ideology: A social identity perspective on polarization. Public Opinion Quarterly, 76(3), 405-431. doi:10.1093/poq/nfs038.
Iyengar, S., & Westwood, S. (2014). Fear and Loathing across Party Lines: New Evidence on Group Polarization. American Journal Of Political Science, 59(3), 690-707. doi: 10.1111/ajps.12152
Kastenmüller, A., Greitemeyer, T., Jonas, E., Fischer, P., & Frey, D. (2010). Selective exposure: The impact of collectivism and individualism. The British Journal of Social Psychology, 49, 745-63. doi:10.1348/014466609X478988
Kish, L. (1965). Sampling Organizations and Groups of Unequal Sizes. American Sociological Review, 30(4), 564. doi: 10.2307/2091346
Levendusky, M. (2013). Why Do Partisan Media Polarize Viewers?. American Journal Of Political Science, 57(3), 611-623. doi: 10.1111/ajps.12008
Levendusky, M. (2014). How Partisan Media Polarize America. University of Chicago Press, USA.
Levendusky, M., & Malhotra, N. (2015). Does Media Coverage of Partisan Polarization Affect Political Attitudes?. Political Communication, 33(2), 283-301. doi: 10.1080/10584609.2015.1038455
Levrat, N., Antunes, S., Tusseau, G., & Williams, P. (2017). Catalonia's legitimate right to decide. Gèneve: Université Gèneve. Retrieved from: https://www.unige.ch/gsi/files/9315/0461/7440/CATALONIAS_LEGITIMATE_RIGHT_DECIDE.pdf
Lozar Manfreda, K., & Vehovar, V. (2012). Internet Surveys. In E. De Leeuw, J. Hox & D. Dillman, International Handbook of Survey Methodology (1st ed.). New York: Taylor & Francis Group.
Lynn, P. (2012). The problem of nonresponse. In E. De Leeuw, J. Hox & D. Dillman, The International Handbook of Survey Methodology (1st ed., pp. 35-55). New York: Taylor & Francis Group.
Mason, L. (2016). A Cross-Cutting Calm. Public Opinion Quarterly, 80(S1), 351-377. doi: 10.1093/poq/nfw001
Matthews, B., & Ross, L. (2010). C3: Questionnaires. In B. Matthews & L. Ross, Research Methods. A practical guide for the social sciences. (pp. 200-217). Harlow: Pearson Education Limited.
Medrano, J. (1994). Patterns of development and nationalism: Basque and Catalan nationalism before the Spanish Civil War. Theory And Society, 23(4), 541-569. doi: 10.1007/bf00992827
Miller, H. & Miller, K. (1996). Language Policy and Identity: the case of Catalonia. International Studies in Sociology of Education, 6(1), 113-128, doi: 10.1080/0962021960060106
Neuman, W. (2014). Social research methods: Qualitative and quantitative approaches (7th ed. new international ed.). Harlow: Pearson Education.
Newman, N., Fletcher, R., Kalogeropoulos, A., Levy, D., & Kleis Nielsen, R. (2018). Digital News Report 2018. Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism. Retrieved from: http://media.digitalnewsreport.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/digital-news-report-2018.pdf?x89475
Papathanassopoulos, S. (2007). The Mediterrenean/Polarized Pluralist Media Model Countries. Intellect Book, 191-200.
Perloff, R. M. (1989). Ego-involvement and the third person effect of televised news coverage. Communication Research, 16, 236-262.
Pi, J. (2017). Los resultados definitivos del 1-O. La Vanguardia. Retrieved from: https://www.lavanguardia.com/politica/20171006/431829595713/resultados-definitivios-1o.html
Prado, E. (2014). The press in Catalonia: between the digital challenge and nation building. Media, Culture & Society, 37(1), 134-143. doi: 10.1177/0163443714553563
Prior, M. (2013). Media and Political Polarization. Annual Review Of Political Science, 16(1), 101-127. doi: 10.1146/annurev-polisci-100711-135242
Rus, M., & Utrero, F. (2019). El plan de Vox para "acabar con el lastre" de las autonomías.[Vox's plan to end up with burden of the Autnomías system]. La Vanguardia. Retrieved from: https://www.lavanguardia.com/politica/20190127/4635308116/el-plan-de-vox-para-acabar-con-el-lastre-de-las-autonomias.html
Salkind, N. (2017). Statistics for people who (think they) hate statistics (6th ed., international student ed.). Thousand Oaks: SAGE.
Sarstedt, M., Bengart, P., Shaltoni, A., & Lehmann, S. (2017). The use of sampling methods in advertising research: a gap between theory and practice. International Journal Of Advertising, 37(4), 650-663. doi: 10.1080/02650487.2017.1348329
Sterba, S., & Foster, M. (2011). Self-Selected Sample. In P. Lavrakas, Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods (pp. 807-808). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, Inc.
Stroud, N. J. (2008). Media use and political predispositions: Revisiting the concept of selective exposure. Political Behavior, 30(3): 341-366. doi: 10.1007/s11109-007-9050-9
Stroud, N. J. (2010). Polarization and Partisan Selective Exposure. Journal Of Communication, 60. doi: doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.2010.01497.x
Stroud, N. J. (2011). Niche news. New York: Oxford University Press.
Stroud, N. J. (2018). Selective Exposure Theories. The Oxford Handbook of Political Communication. Oxford University Press.
Taylor, S. (2012). Control Variable. In S. Boslaugh, Encyclopedia of Epidemiology (pp. 234-235). Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications, Inc.
Tsfati, Y. (2016). A New Measure for the Tendency to Select Ideologically Congruent Political Information: Scale Development and Validation. International Journal Of Communication, 10, 200-225.
Tugas, R. (2015). Resultats definitius del 27-S: JxSí i la CUP queden a menys de 80.000 electors de la majoria absoluta en vots. [Definitive results of 27-S: JxSí and CUP left out of the absolute majority of votes for only 80.000 voters]. Ara. Retrieved from: https://www.Ara.cat/politica/Resultats-definitius-JxSi-CUP-majoria-absoluta-vots-escons-eleccions-plebiscitaries-27-S_0_1448855291.html
Turner, J., Brown, R., & Tajfel, H. (1979). Social comparison and group interest in ingroup favouritism. European Journal Of Social Psychology, 9(2), 187-204. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.2420090207
Vallone, R., Ross, L., & Lepper, M. (1985). The hostile media phenomenon: Biased perception and perceptions of media bias in coverage of the Beirut massacre. Journal Of Personality And Social Psychology, 49(3), 577-585. doi: 10.1037//0022-3514.49.3.577
Weber, M., & Koehler, C. (2017). Illusions of Knowledge: Media Exposure and Citizens' Perceived Political Competence. International Journal Of Comunication, 11, 2387-2410. doi: 1932-8036/20170005












APPENDIX A 
Questionnaire translated into English
Q1 State the language in which you want to do the questionnaire
a) Spanish
b) Catalan
Q2 The following survey aims to know more about the online news outlets that Catalans used to gather information during the 1st of October of 2017. Thank you for the interest and the willingness to answer this questionnaire, it won't take more than 10 minutes to completely fill it. This research is part of a Master thesis that the author is currently doing in the Erasmus University Rotterdam. All the information and data provided in this survey will be processed anonymously and it will only be used for the academical purposes beforementioned. Please answer honestly and expressing your opinion, there are no good or bad answers. Thank you again for participating. By clicking the checkbox of "Accept" you are verifying that you have read the previous information and that you agree in participating. Remember that you can abandon the survey at any time.
a) Accept
Q3 Indicate with numbers:
a) Year of birth
Q4 Gender:
a) Feminine
b) Masculine
c) I don't want to answer
Q4 Are you born in Catalonia?
a) Yes
b) No
Q5 In which Catalan province have you reside the most?
a) Barcelona
b) Girona
c) Lleida
d) Tarragona
Q6 Could you indicate with which frequency do you usually read news on the Internet?
a) Everyday/Almost every day
b) Two or three times per week
c) Once per week
d) Two or three times per month
e) Never
Q7 Could you indicate which of the following online news outlets did you check last week? You can select more than one option
a) El País
b) El Mundo
c) ABC
d) La Razón
e) La Vanguardia
f) El Diario
g) TV3
h) Vilaweb
i) Ara
j) Other pages (open answer category)
Q8 Could you indicate towards which political party do you have more sympathy:
a) Partido Popular (PPC)
b) Esquerra Republicana (ERC)
c) Partido Socialista (PSC)
d) Ciudadanos (Cs)
e) Partit Demòcrata de Catalunya (PdeCat)
f) Catalunya en Comú Podem 
g) Other parties (open answer category
h) None
Q9 Indicate your opinion towards each of the political leaders' performance during the referendum of the 1st of October of 2017, being 0 exceptionally unfavorable and 10 exceptionally favorable:
a) Xavier García Albiol
b) Carles Puigdemont
c) Oriol Junqueras
d) Anna Gabriel
e) Inés Arrimadas
f) Miquel Iceta
g) Xavier Doménech

Q10 Could you indicate how would you like the relationship between Spain and Catalonia to be? Do you think Catalonia have to be...
a) A region of Spain
b) An Autonomous Community of Spain
c) A state inside a federal Spain
d) An independent state
Q11 How comfortable would you feel if you had a good friend that support the independence of Catalonia/ the unitarism of Catalonia?
a) Not comfortable at all
b) Not very comfortable
c) A little bit comfortable
d) Very comfortable
Q12 Would you say that you support the unitarism of Catalonia/the independence of Catalonia because of what the movement represents or because you are contrary to the people that defend the independence/unitarism of Catalonia?
a) Because of what the independence/unitarism represents
b) Because I'm against independence/unitarism people
Q13 During the events of the 1st of October referendum to which of the following online news outlets did you access for gathering information of what was happening? You can choose more than one option
a) El País
b) El Mundo
c) ABC
d) La Razón
e) La Vanguardia
f) El Diario
g) TV3
h) Vilaweb
i) Ara
j) Other pages (open answer category)
Q14 Indicate the level of trust that you assign to the following online news outlets. Please indicate if you tend to trust or not each of them. (1 = Completely untrust, 5 = Completely trust).
a) El País
b) El Mundo
c) ABC
d) La Razón
e) La Vanguardia
f) El Diario
g) TV3
h) Vilaweb
i) Ara
Q15 In general do you think that the following online news outlets covered the 1st of October referendum in a positive way towards the independence supporters, towards the unitarism supporters or in a neutral way? Please, indicate your valuation for each of the online news outlets. 
a) El País
b) El Mundo
c) ABC
d) La Razón
e) La Vanguardia
f) El Diario
g) TV3
h) Vilaweb
i) Ara
Q16 Indicate if you agree or not with the following statements (1 = Strongly disagree, 5= Strongly agree) 
a)I try to avoid exposure to media outlets expressing irritating opinions
b) I try to expose myself only to media outlets and news messages that are in line with my own attitudes"
c)I try to expose myself to all the opinions heard in the media equally" (reverse coded) 
d) If I need to select between two op-ed pieces, I'll choose the one that is closer to my opinions
e) It is important for me to read not just articles supporting my views, but also articles opposing my views" (reverse coded)"
Q17 Read the following news report that was published during the 1st of October referendum:
Image of El País headline
Q18 Indicate if according to you, the previous headline reported in a trustworthy way the events of the 1st of October of 2017.
a) Not at all
b) Not much
c) Partially
d) Extremely 
Q19 Indicate if you feel discomfort with the way of reporting that the previous online news outlet used 
a) Not at all
b) Not much
c) A little bit
d) Extremely
Q20 To which online news outlet do you think it belongs?
a) La Razón
b) La Vanguardia
c) El País
d) Vilaweb
e) TV3
f) None of the previous ones
Q21 Read the following news report that was published during the 1st of October referendum:
Image of La Vanguardia headline
Q22 Indicate if according to you, the previous headline reported in a trustworthy way the events of the 1st of October of 2017.
a) Not at all
b) Not much
c) Partially
d) Extremely 
Q23 Indicate if you feel discomfort with the way of reporting that the previous online news outlet used 
a) Not at all
b) Not much
c) A little bit
d) Extremely
Q24 To which online news outlet do you think it belongs?
a) La Razón
b) La Vanguardia
c) El País
d) Vilaweb
e) TV3
f) None of the previous ones
Q25 Read the following news report that was published during the 1st of October referendum:
Image of La Vanguardia headline
Q26 Indicate if according to you, the previous headline reported in a trustworthy way the events of the 1st of October of 2017.
a) Not at all
b) Not much
c) Partially
d) Extremely 
Q27 Indicate if you feel discomfort with the way of reporting that the previous online news outlet used 
a) Not at all
b) Not much
c) A little bit
d) Extremely
Q28 To which online news outlet do you think it belongs?
a) La Razón
b) La Vanguardia
c) El País
d) Vilaweb
e) TV3
f) None of the previous ones



APPENDIX B
Table 1B. Crosstabulation of Supporters leaning and Perception online news outlets discourse
Pro-independence discourse Neutral discourse Pro-unitarism discourse El País (N=177)Pro-independence supporters1.6%2.4%96.1%Pro-unitarism supporters6.0%32.0%62.0%El Mundo (N=183)Pro-independence supporters0.8%1.5%97.7%Pro-unitarism supporters3.9%13.7%82.4%ABC (N=186)Pro-independence supporters0.0%1.5%98.5%Pro-unitarism supporters1.9%11.5%86.5%La Razón  (N=183)Pro-independence supporters0.0%0.0%100%Pro-unitarism supporters1.9%9.4%88.7%El Diario (N=134)Pro-independence supporters5.1%49.0%45.9%Pro-unitarism supporters13.9%58.3%27.8%TV3 (N=216)Pro-independence supporters49.3%50.0%0.7%Pro-unitarism supporters85.9%14.1%0.0%Vilaweb (N=216)Pro-independence supporters82.9%17.1%0.0%Pro-unitarism supporters90.2%9.8%0.0%Ara (N=197)Pro-independence supporters68.1%30.5%1.4%Pro-unitarism supporters89.3%8.9%1.8%




A small series of serendipity
Balancing serendipity in the algorithmic recommendation design of video-on-demand layouts based on consumer characteristics






Student name:		Anne Claire Kofflard
Student number:		386160

Supervisor: 			Dr. João Ferreira Goncalves 

Media & Creative Industries
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication 
Erasmus University Rotterdam

Master Thesis
June 29th 2020

A small series of serendipity 
Balancing serendipity in the algorithmic recommendation design of video-on-demand layouts based on consumer characteristics

ABSTRACT

      Recommendation systems are a common tool to guide consumers through information and product overload in online environments. The evolving market of video-on-demand (VOD) embraced the prospect of recommendation systems and is continuously searching to enhance its performance. The implementation of serendipity in recommendation systems is increasingly linked as a solution for the issue of filter bubbles and to assess and evaluate user satisfaction within VOD platforms. However, the concept of serendipity introduces complexity in analyzing its implementation, due to its subjective essence and absence of an academic definition and measurement. This thesis provides a literary foundation on recommendation systems, consideration of particular consumer characteristics in user profiles, and a definition and measurement of serendipity. Therefore, this thesis's objective is to establish the role and level of serendipity in VOD environments for consumers that present particular characteristics by following the research question: To what extent do users perceive and are affected by serendipity in VOD layouts?.
      Similar to correlated literature, a quantitative approach is employed with data collecting through the distribution of a survey that includes a quasi-experiment. The data is gathered amongst VOD consumers that possess a user profile without the interference of others. Statistical analysis is performed with the help of SPSS and found that two serendipity items, instead of three, are applicable in the research design. The serendipity elements of novelty and unexpectedness are combined, while relevance is separately considered. 
      Concluded from the insignificant paths between consumer characteristics and both serendipity elements, the findings of this thesis indicate the inability of consumers to perceive serendipity in their personalized VOD environment and a 100% serendipity stimulus. The main results indicate that the serendipity component of relevance records the most substantial mediating effect on the performance of the recommendation systems, measured by means of user satisfaction. To known knowledge, this thesis is the second attempt that considers the need for serendipity for specific consumer characteristics in VOD environments. By including the presented consumer characteristics in user profiles, the coping ability and need for serendipity are reflected in the algorithmic design and, therefore, the personalized VOD interface. The implementation of serendipity based on consumer characteristics helps consumers to broaden their preferences and VOD companies to increasingly set foot in the evolving market. 
KEYWORDS: Serendipity, VOD companies, recommendation systems, consumer characteristics 
TABLE OF CONTENT

1. INTRODUCTION	5
2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK	9
2.1 Video-on-demand layout	9
2.2 Recommendation systems	13
2.3 Consumer characteristics	17
2.3.1 Binge-watch behavior	18
2.3.2 Knowledgeable consumers	19
2.3.3 Broad interest in genre	20
2.3.4 Users' need for uniqueness	21
2.3.5. User perception of VOD layouts	22
2.4 Serendipity	22
2.4.1 Novelty	23
2.4.2 Unexpectedness	24
2.4.3 Relevance	24
2.5 Conceptual framework	26
3. METHOD	27
3.1 Methodological approach	27
3.2 Research design	27
3.2.1 Survey structure	28
3.2.2 Stimulus	29
3.2.3 Data collection	30
3.3 Descriptive statistics	32
3.3.1 Descriptive statistics: respondents	32
3.3.2 Descriptive statistics: VOD platforms	33
3.4 Variables and reliability	34
3.4.1 Consumer characteristics	35
3.4.2 Serendipity	40
3.4.3 User perception of VOD layouts	42
3.4.4 Control variables	43
3.5 Reliability and validity	44
4. RESULTS	47
4.1 Assumption check	47
4.2 Mediation model of the serendipity scale before the stimulus	49
4.2.1 Direct effect of consumer characteristics and user satisfaction	50
4.2.2 Mediation effect before the stimulus	52
4.2.3 Conditional effects	54
4.3 Mediation model of the serendipity scale after the stimulus	56
4.3.1 Direct effect of consumer characteristics and user satisfaction	57
4.3.2 Mediation effect	58
4.3.3 Conditional effects	60
4.4 Hypothesis testing	62
5. DISCUSSION	64
5.1 Literature implications	64
5.1.1 The perception of serendipity	64
5.1.2 The mediating role of serendipity	66
5.1.3 User satisfaction in VOD environments	68
5.2 Institutional implication	69
5.3 Limitations	70
5.4 Future research	71
6. CONCLUSION	73
REFERENCES	75
APPENDIX A. SURVEY	85
APPENDIX B. LINKS STIMULUS	96
APPENDIX C. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS	99


16 1. INTRODUCTION

      The concept of serendipity is long ago introduced in different academic fields. The accidental discovery of new medicine, such as penicillin and Viagra (Golin, 1957; Ban, 2006), the entrepreneurial success based on random coincidences (Dew, 2009), and finding unsought art (Van Andel, 1994) are all examples of serendipity. A fairytale understanding of serendipity in The Three Princess of Serendip (1758) by Horace Walpole explained serendipity as accidental discoveries on is not searching for (Kotkov, Veijalainen & Wang, 2018b). Although the definition of serendipity across disciplinary fields moderately differs, overlap is identified within the importance of connection building, discovery, and creativity (Foster & Ford, 2003). However, no consensus is found regarding a concrete and clear definition of serendipity and the measurement thereof. Especially since its introduction in news and information recommendation systems, and more recently, recommendation systems within e-commerce environments and streaming platforms, the concept of serendipity is becoming increasingly vague (Ricci, Rokach & Shapira, 2012). A recommendation system is a tool used by, for example, streaming platforms that engage in the problem of information and product overload (Vozalis & Margaritis, 2003). These recommendation systems provide personalized content based on multiple filtering techniques and implementation of different evaluation concepts, such as utility, diversity, and serendipity, to increase its performance (Kotkov et al., 2018b; Silveira, Zhang, Lin, Liu & Ma, 2019).
      The evaluation concept of serendipity is relatively new compared to previously mentioned concepts in recommendation systems (Yu, Wang, Fan, Meng and Huang, 2017). Lacking a definition and measurement, scholars continuously attempt to contribute to the debate of serendipity. Maccatrozzo, Terstall, Aroyo and Schreiber (2017b, p. 35) explain serendipity in television recommender systems as 'making pleasant and relevant discovery that was unexpected'. Such serendipitous recommendations are perceived by a consumer as a positive surprise that shows unfamiliar but attractive content (Matt, Benlian, Hess & Weiß, 2014). Derived from Kotkov et al. (2018b), the article by Saat, Noah and Mohd (2018) describe and measure serendipity in recommendation systems using three components: relevance, unexpectedness, and novelty. These components measure the similarity between the item and user, the level of satisfaction when finding unexpected items, and the familiarity of the item. 
      Recommendation systems within streaming platforms are becoming more important as the competition rises. Especially in the video-on-demand (VOD) market, data gathering, profiling, and selective filtering are an everyday business (O'Reilly, 2009; Möller, Trilling, Helberger & van Es, 2018). A recommendation system that provides the most appealing platform layout can persuade consumers to choose a particular video streaming service (Ricci et al., 2012). In this recommendation system, serendipity plays an important role, as it might provide satisfactory content to users that they otherwise would not have found while navigating on their own (Kotkov et al., 2018b; Maccatrozzo, van Everdingen, Aroyo & Schreiber, 2017a). 
      The creation of personalized recommendations is based on online consumer behavior and other consumer data, such as demographic information that is collected in a user profile (Bozdag, 2015). The subjective nature of serendipity makes the implementation different than other evaluation metrics, such as accuracy. Some consumers with particular preferences are in need of a higher level of serendipity in order to be satisfied with provided recommendations by VOD companies. To illustrate, Maccatrozzo et al. (2017a) argue that curious consumers require a higher level of serendipity in their provided recommendations because they have a higher coping ability towards novel items. This thesis continues on the research objective by Maccatrozzo et al. (2017a) through the introduction of four additional consumer characteristics: (1) hours spent on VOD platforms, (2) knowledgeable consumers, (3) broad interest in genre, and (4) users' need for uniqueness. Therefore, the following research question is constructed:
      
To what extent do users perceive and are affected by serendipity in VOD layouts?
   
      The importance of serendipity within a recommender system lies in the prevention of the filter bubble, a concept introduced by Pariser (2011). The invisible digital borders of the filter bubble provide selective and personalized recommendations that create an isolated algorithmic culture and shape one-sided perceptions of the daily news (Hallinan & Striphas, 2014). An example of a negative implication of the filter bubble is an ideological polarized news content bubble during the 2016 Presidential Election in the United States on Facebook. Here, Republicans and Democrats were confronted continuously with one-sided news revolving around public discourse and political information congruent with their ideological point of view (Spohr, 2017). Another example is the recent discovery of a pedophile network as YouTube created with the help of its recommender system. Once a video is watched regarding some form of exploitation of children, the recommendation algorithm suggests the next video with slightly more extreme content. Hence, the algorithmic design of YouTube proved to be, accidentally, helpful for pedophiles (Eordogh, 2019; Orphanides, 2019). The solution for these examples: serendipity. Recommendation systems guide consumers through product and information overloaded platforms. Therefore, they influence what we consume. Better performance of recommendation system through the implementation of serendipity can make suggestions of content to educate and present a broader perspective on structural mindsets (Hallinan & Striphas, 2014). 
      By examining serendipity in VOD recommendation systems, awareness is raised regarding diversity in content. This can be illustrated by the following. In the past years, the number of subscribers to video-on-demand services steadily developed together with the time subscribers spent watching content (Jenner, 2015). Therefore, the content provided by these platforms increasingly influences our choices and thoughts, as 80% that is consumed is derived from recommendations (Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015), and one is likely to believe the content one watches. Also, due to the content overload of VOD catalogs, consumers are increasingly overdependent on algorithmic suggestions (Banker & Khetani, 2019). Bursting the filter bubble and highlighting concepts from different viewpoints contributes to a better understanding of, for example, cultures other than one's own (Hallinan & Striphas, 2014).
      On the one hand, for the consumer of video streaming platforms, the relevance of this study is to become aware of the content that shapes the filter bubble that limits their interests and perspectives. Consequently, consumers are stimulated to broaden their horizon and increase serendipity in their recommendations by breaking the pattern of the algorithm and search for content that they normally discard (Maccatrozzo et al., 2017b). On the other hand, for VOD companies, the relevance of this thesis is the evaluation of algorithmic designs, with a renewed perspective on the implementation of serendipity, in order to increase the provided recommendation service. 
      Although the concept of serendipity in different fields is broadly explored, such as entrepreneurship and medicine, research concerning serendipity within recommender systems of VOD platforms is lacking. One of the reasons for this deficient research is due to the absence of some sort of tool to analyze serendipity (Saat et al., 2018) and the mysteriousness around algorithms from VOD corporations, such as Netflix (Hallinan & Striphas, 2014). The study by Maccatrozzo et al. (2017a) is the first step to uncover the need for serendipitous items based on the personality trait of curiosity. This thesis goes one step further by adding consumer characteristics that potentially affect the evaluation of recommendation systems due to the coping ability to perceive serendipitous items. 
      As stated above, this study focuses on the concept of serendipity presented in the layout of video-on-demand platforms from a consumer's approach. To address the research gap, multiple definitions and measurements of serendipity in video-on-demand recommendation systems are explored and combined in one definition and three components of measurements. The influence of the measurements on user satisfaction is tested by means of an online survey distributed amongst video-on-demand users. The remainder of this thesis will be structured as follows. First, previous research on VOD layouts, recommendation systems, and consumer characteristics in user profiles is discussed together with the formulation of testable hypotheses. Next, the research method of this study is explained, providing further insight into the sample and the data. Third, the results are presented and interpreted. Subsequently, the objective of this thesis is discussed extensively by using the findings. Fifth, contributions to literature and managerial implications, limitations, and future research are discussed. Finally, the conclusion addresses the research question once more.
      

17 2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
	
      The following chapter discusses the existing academic literature regarding the perception of serendipity in recommendation systems of Video-on-demand (VOD) companies. First, the background information on the industry of VOD and the construction of their interfaces are described. Second, an overview of the relevant recommendation systems, in the context of VOD platforms, is presented, and the importance of serendipity-greedy algorithms is underlined. Third, four different consumer characteristics that construct user profiles and affect the perception of serendipity, are presented. Next, the concept of serendipity, including the three dimensions of serendipity, is analyzed. Subsequently, by investigating previous academic literature on the field of VOD layouts, the construction of recommendation systems, and serendipity in user profiles based on consumer characteristics, hypotheses are designed that answer the central research question. To conclude, a conceptual framework including all stated hypothesis is presented, where serendipity acts as a mediating variable between consumer characteristics and the perception of VOD layouts. 

      17.1 2.1 Video-on-demand layout
      Video-on-demand (VOD) companies changed the way we watch television. Due to the digitalization of television, a new era of consuming TV content enables consumers to watch television whenever they want, wherever they want (Jenner, 2014; Maccatrozzo et al., 2017a). Wayne (2018, p. 729) describes VOD as a platform that provides access 'to television content and acting as a gateway for viewers'. Due to easy access to TV content and the easy to understand interfaces on multiple devices, such as mobile phones and tablets (Maccatrozzo et al., 2017a), consumers watch more content for a longer period (Matrix, 2014). This binge-watching behavior is characterized by self-scheduled sequential consumption of multiple episodes without advertisement breaks and required attention of the consumer (Horeck, Jenner & Kendall, 2018).
      The global introduction of VOD companies has not only changed the way consumers watch television; it changed the entire television industry. As an idea borrowed from the concept pay-per-view, VOD set foot as an online video streaming distributor that released films before the DVD release (Hilderbrand, 2010). Nowadays, VOD companies, such as Netflix1, Amazon Prime Video2, Hulu3 and the Dutch Videoland,4 create their own content. An example is the Netflix Original House of Cards. Additional to their operations as a movie and series distributor, VOD companies exhibit (Jenner, 2014) and collect consumer data for the benefit of their consumers (Bennett & Lanning, 2007). In this research, the focus is on the collection of consumer data by VOD companies, as this data forms recommendation systems that structure VOD layouts. Gathering and compiling data is realized by the implementation of publication models and layouts that stimulate binge-watching and manipulate the consumers' viewing behavior (Jenner, 2015). This data helps to improve the customer experience by, for example, guiding the consumer through the movie catalog with the help of personalized recommendations and a consumer-friendly interface (Ricci et al., 2012; Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015).
      With the launch of Disney+5 in November 2019, the dynamics of the VOD industry, with Netflix as a leader, changed (Barnes, 2019). In 2018, almost 40 million people in the US were subscribed to Netflix and 25 million to Amazon Prime Video (Statista Research Department, 2020b). In February 2020, three months after their launch, Disney+ hit the mark of 28.6 million global subscribers (Barnes, 2020). To stand out on the VOD market, companies such as Netflix and Disney+ aim to provide high-quality original content.  Additionally, the companies aim to provide an accurate recommendation system, the most appealing and most accessible platform layout (Almeida Lima, Gouveia Moreira & Costa Calazans, 2015; Johnson, 2017). 
      Due to the rise of competition in the video-on-demand industry, accurate recommendation systems and easy to understand VOD layouts are becoming increasingly important, as they contribute to the choice of platform consumers, by providing a positive user experience (Ricci et al., 2012; Pripužić, Žarko, Podobnik, Lovrek, Čavka, Petković, ... Gojčeta, 2013; Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015). Layouts or interfaces of VOD platforms can be characterized as an interactive space with online TV content. Within this space 'the logics of broadcasting meet the possibilities of programming, software and algorithms in ways that shape and construct the experience of TV online' (Johnson, 2017, p. 123). The layout is continuously updated according to the viewing habits of the consumer and the provided content by VOD companies corresponds to timeframes or particular days (Johnson, 2017). VOD layouts consist of different algorithmic elements that contribute to the accessibility, navigation design, personalization, and general optimization of the entire page (Ricci et al., 2012). 
      The analysis of VOD layouts has been underrepresented in the literature. However, research regarding interfaces in general is applied for marketing purposes to uncover consumer decision-making. For example, consideration sets are used in e-commerce environments to manipulate the choice of the consumer within an information-overloaded platform (Malhotra, 1982; Häubl & Trifts, 2000). Consumers purposefully search for familiar products and are presented with multiple similar alternatives. In this way, consumers can choose similar unfamiliar brands that perhaps better fit with their preferences, and therefore, maximize user satisfaction (Shocker, Ben-Akiva, Boccara & Nedungadi, 1991; Häubl & Trifts, 2000; Bhattacharya, Gollapudi & Munagala, 2011). 
      Consumers within a VOD environment are faced with information overload as well. VOD subscribers are overwhelmed when they are presented with too many options and quickly lose their interest after 60 to 90 seconds in their chosen TV content (Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015). VOD interfaces provide consumers with similar content when they purposefully search for items in the catalog (Häubl & Trifts, 2000; Ricci et al., 2012). This consideration set recommending similar content is extended by other sets of recommendation algorithms that guide consumers without specified search preferences. These recommendations shape VOD interfaces to stimulate binge-watching and maximize user satisfaction (Ricci et al., 2012; Jenner, 2015).
      To illustrate, as the leader in the VOD industry and precursor of VOD recommendation systems, Netflix is the most common case study for scholars regarding data-driven interfaces of such platforms (Berry, Fazzio, Zhou, Scott & Francisco-Revilla, 2010; Ricci et al., 2012; Hallinan & Striphas, 2014; Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015). The fact that Netflix values their position in the market and aims to improve and develop their recommendation system within their layout is reflected in the Netflix Prize. The Netflix Prize 'challenged the data mining, machine learning and computer science communities to develop systems that could beat the accuracy of Cinematch by certain amounts' (Bennett & Lanning, 2007, p. 3). The interface of Netflix is generated through ranking and row selection constructed by popularized and personalized recommendations. For example, similar to the consideration set presented in e-commerce platforms (Häubl & Trifts, 2000; Bhattacharya, Gollapudi & Munagala, 2011; Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015), Netflix provides similar alternatives in the 'Because You Watched' rows based on a particular film or series. This row is constructed through previously watched content and personalized tags, such as genre, director, or actors. Within the personalized genre rows, three layers of personalization are included: the genre, a subgroup of videos selected within that genre, and the rank that predicts the level of enjoyment for each consumer. The possible high level of unfamiliar items in personalized rows is balanced with the implementation of popular items. Popularity items are included in personalized rows, and popularity rows, such as a top 10, are displayed. Netflix even takes one step further by incorporating impression and presentation data to measure user's responses on different types of TV content presentations to match the user's preferences to their own interface (Ricci et al., 2012; Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015). Derived from consumer data, the complex and variant algorithms bundle their homepage and 'define the Netflix experience' (Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015, p. 13:2).
      Amazon, an e-commerce platform, suggested recommendations to their customers before the establishment of the video streaming platform Amazon Prime Video (Jenner, 2015). Due to the increased use of video-on-demand, Amazon Prime Video started to create popular in-house productions, such as Golden Globe winner Fleabag, offering live television and distributing other TV content in their catalog. Compared to the interface of Netflix, Amazon Prime Video is less sophisticated and less focused on the constant improvement of user experience and satisfaction. Similar to Netflix, the Amazon Prime Video interface is made of personalized and popularized rows. 
      Another example of a VOD layout analyzed in academic literature is Hulu (Johnson, 2017). The interface of Hulu is more focused on the broadcasting flow rather than recommendations. On account of their business model, Hulu narrows the differences between the old and new ways of watching TV content by providing live and linear television, aside from their catalog such as full seasons of their original content. Moreover, advertisements on Hulu are still visible, while other VOD platforms display brands in TV content or use brands to attract new subscribers (Wayne, 2018). 
      The way VOD layouts are constructed play a crucial part in user experiences. Factors such as accessibility, high-quality content, and the additional service of providing recommendations matter for consumers (Ricci et al., 2012). As the underrepresentation of VOD layout in existing literature leaves room for further research, this study investigates features that construct the interfaces: recommendation systems. 
17.2 	2.2 Recommendation systems
      Recommendation systems are used in different online environments, such as in social media platforms to suggest content fitting the user preferences and in e-commerce to help consumers choose the right product (Xiao & Benbasat, 2007). Realizing the importance of recommendations within information-overloaded platforms to guide consumers, VOD companies have implemented recommendation systems as a strategy to not only provide TV content but create the full consumer experience. With the increasing amount of VOD companies and other online streaming services, such as YouTube6 and Vimeo7, the importance of consumer experience increases in order to maintain subscribers and possibly 'steal' subscribers from other platforms (Soares & Viana, 2015). In 2012, Netflix claimed that 75% of the consumed content was watched because it was recommended (Nguyen, Hui, Harper, Terveen & Konstan, 2014). Additionally, the consumer is likely to leave the VOD platform when it fails to find the right content. Therefore, it is vital for both the company and the subscribers that recommended content is inviting and encouraging (Bennet & Lanning, 2007; Ricci et al., 2012). 
	Kotkov et al. (2018b, p. 2) explain recommender systems as 'software tools that suggest items of use to users'. In line with Kotkov et al. (2018b), Ricci et al. (2012, p. 1) define recommender systems as 'software tools and techniques that provide suggestions for items that are most likely of interest to a particular user'. Consumers input data, implicitly or explicitly, to a recommendation system that aims to uncover their preferences (Vozalis & Margaritis, 2003). The user explicitly reveals information regarding his interests and preferences through, for example, rating particular TV content. Implicit input is gathered through the online behavior of the user, such as web usage mining (Bozdag, 2015; Haim, Graefe & Brosius, 2018). These inputs result in personalized recommendation or prediction outputs based on filtering algorithms (Vozalis & Margaritis, 2003; Konstan & Riedl, 2012). Constructed by humans, algorithms are a computerized path that determines the design of the consumers' recommendations (Vozalis & Margaritis, 2003). Ricci et al. (2012) list various reasons and goals for services providers, such as e-commerce and VOD platforms, to implement recommendation systems. Increasing the number of sold items or, in the context of VOD services, watched content, is their key function. Additional functions are an increase in diversity of items, user satisfaction, user loyalty, and a better understanding of user preferences.
      The success of VOD interfaces depends on the success of personalized recommendations and, therefore, the architecture of the algorithmic filtering method (Ricci et al., 2012). Through filtering, VOD recommendation systems leave out non-relevant items and predict possible relevant items through machine learning techniques for each user by means of three different methods: collaborative filtering, content-based filtering and demographic filtering (Ghazanfar & Prigel-Bennet, 2010; Möller et al., 2018). Without any personalization, popularity-based recommendations would create identical VOD interfaces for each user and limit opportunities for smaller productions (Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015; Bressan, Leucci, Panconesi, Raghavan & Terolli, 2016). 
      First, collaborative filtering, social information filtering or neighborhood selection 'automates the process of "word-of-mouth" recommendations: items are recommended to a user based upon values assigned by other people with similar taste' (Konstan & Riedl, 2012; Bozdag, 2015, p. 20). According to Vozalis and Margaritis (2003), these user-user similarities are based on memory within an algorithm and combined in a collection of related consumers. User-user collaborative filtering is proven too slow for platforms with a large consumer base; therefore, item-item collaborative filtering was developed that adapted more rapidly regarding the increase of online environments. This filtering technique shows similarities with consideration sets, a marketing function in e-commerce platforms, that pairs highly similar items. However, through neighborhood selection in e-commerce platforms, alternative product recommendations were not surprising, and it was likely that the consumer would already buy the recommended product in the first place (Konstan & Riedl, 2012). The fact that collaborative filtering is mostly based on explicit data is problematic, as the percentage of ratings assigned by consumers is low. This eventually leads to low-quality recommendations and a lack of diverse recommendations (Ghazanfar & Prugel-Bennett, 2010; Nguyen et al., 2014). As Konstan and Riedl (2012, p. 104) explain 'businesses didn't want to waste a recommendation on a product customer would likely purchase anyway (e.g., bananas in a supermarket), and thus favored more "serendipitous" recommendation'. To overcome problems, such as incomplete data regarding new users and products, demographic and content-based filtering could be implemented. 
      Second, content-based filtering analyses the previous content of the user to construct recommendations. Items contain text-based information, such as the genre of series or movies, that is matched to the profile of the user (Ghazanfar & Prugel-Bennett, 2010; Soares & Viana, 2015; Saat et al., 2018). In contrast to collaborative filtering, content-based filtering provides quality recommendations when a low input of explicit data is available (Saat et al., 2018). Gathering data is established by means of the information tags previously consumed content (Vozalis & Margaritis, 2003). Saat et al. (2018) identify three issues regarding content-based filtering in general content-based recommendation systems. First, the issue of the cold start where no previous data is available because the user is completely new to the web. Second, limit text-based information results in low-quality recommendations as the system is not able to distinguish the likes and dislikes of the user. Finally, over-specialization of the recommended items with an exceptional high similarity rate and results in limited recommendations solely based on previously watched content. Serendipity is presented as a potential solution for the issue of over-specialization in content-based recommendation systems. 
      Third, demographic filtering constructs a user profile on information such as age, gender, and education (Vozalis & Margaritis, 2003). In the Netflix recommender system, information regarding a series or movie genre is processed as demographic data (Ghazanfar & Prugel-Bennett, 2010). Demographic filtering is tied to some difficulties, as this data is collected explicitly and consumers are careful about share such information (Vozalis & Margaritis, 2003).
	Hybrid filtering methods are applied in VOD recommendation algorithms that combine the previously listed filtering methods (Vozalis & Margaritis, 2003; Ricci et al., 2012; Ghanzanfar & Prigel-Bennett, 2010). Within the Netflix algorithm, a user profile is built according to a recommendation technique and a list of possible recommendations is constructed. Other filtering methods constantly refine this list. Hybrid recommendation systems decrease the problems that collaborative, content-based, and demographic filtering face. Still, two potential problems arise regarding scalability, meaning the adaptability and speed of the generation of recommendation, and quality (Ghanzanfar & Prigel-Bennett, 2010). However, the main concern regarding recommendation methods is the high accuracy rate caused by over-personalization or over-specialization (Nguyen et al., 2014). When consumers are confronted continuously with highly similar content that they already have experienced, other content in different genres is overlooked, and the recommendations are repeated (Maccatrozzo, 2012; Soares & Viana, 2015). 
      The filter bubble, coined by Pariser (2011), describes this filtering problem. Building a user profile by accurate social filtering limits the exposure of other interesting content and decreases the possibility of creative, educational, and coherent thinking (Nguyen et al., 2014). Additionally, a feedback loop potentially occurs where recommendations are provided, the user interacts with recommended items, and the platform offers similar recommendations (Chaney, Stewart & Engelhardt, 2018). All users of online platforms could be exposed to filter bubbles; they are invisible, individual, biased, and involuntary (Bozdag, 2015). Modifying the filters to widen the reach of recommended items is not the solution to overcome over-personalization, as consumers expect to experience relevant recommendations with minimum effort and time (Maccatrozzo, 2012). Additionally, recent research by Banker and Khetani (2019) concluded that consumers are increasingly overdependent on recommendation algorithms. Therefore, the importance of tackling the filter bubble is intensified. The harm in the filter bubble is the constant reaffirming of consumers' existing viewpoints and contradicting of opposed ideas (Bozdag, 2015; Hiam et al., 2018). Moreover, concerns are raised that too often users receive recommendations that they are already familiar with (Matt et al., 2014). To burst the filter bubble, multiple research suggests the implementation of serendipity (Ricci et al., 2012; Maccatrozzo et al., 2017b; Saat et al., 2018; Kotkov et al., 2018b; Silveira et al., 2019).
	VOD platforms aim to prevent filter bubbles and maximize user satisfaction by increasing the performance of the recommendation systems. In academic literature, the performance of recommendation systems is evaluated according to different components. Within the competitive Netflix Prize, the performance of each recommendation system is measured by means of root mean square error that predicts the ratings of items given by consumers (De Vriendt, Degrande & Verhoeyen, 2011). Vozalis and Margaritis (2003) evaluated the prediction quality of different recommendation systems according to accuracy and coverage. Silveira et al. (2019) argue that a well-working recommendation system seeks balance between evaluation metrics of utility, novelty, diversity, unexpectedness, coverage, and serendipity. The research measures the outcome of recommendation systems according to user perceptions through the perception of serendipity, as presented in the article by Kotkov et al. (2018a).
	A serendipity-greedy algorithm is proven to add value for recommendation systems (Maccatrozzo et al., 2017b; Yu et al., 2017; Kotkov et al., 2018b; Saat et al., 2019). Yu et al. (2017) propose a strategy to balance accuracy and serendipity in a consumer-controlled environment to match their preferences and adding surprising and high-quality serendipitous items. Including a high level of serendipity in VOD layouts, 'triggers a positive effective state in the user (interest) that motivates her to follow the recommendation' (Maccatrozzo et al., 2017b, p. 36). The serendipity-greedy algorithm introduced by Kotkov, Konstan, Zhao and Veijalainen (2018a) investigates the independent nature of accuracy, diversity, and serendipity in recommender systems. The research concludes that a high level of serendipity naturally results in a decrease in accuracy and an increase in diversity. Additionally, Chen, Yang, Wang, Yang, and Yuan (2019) experiment with popularity, relevance, novelty, and serendipity-oriented algorithms and conclude that the serendipity-greedy algorithm presents the highest level of user satisfaction compared to the other three. The effectiveness of the provided recommendations is determined by the decision-making process of consumers and the profile of the user (Silveira et al., 2019).

17.3 	2.3 Consumer characteristics
	If recommendation systems in VOD platforms are increasingly personalized, consequently, the importance of deconstructing the decision-making process and characteristics of the consumers, increases. Moreover, the effectiveness of the provided recommendations is determined by the profile of the user (Silveira et al., 2019). In turn, data collection derived from online consumer behavior builds user profiles of VOD platforms (Vozalis & Margaritis, 2003). Multiple factors in consumer behavior could potentially affect the outcome of recommendation algorithms, shape the design of a personalized VOD interface, and determine the level of user satisfaction (Maccatrozzo et al., 2017b). 
      Established in the previous section, the presence of serendipity contributes to the consumer value towards VOD companies (Maccatrozzo et al., 2017b; Yu et al., 2017; Kotkov et al., 2018b; Saat et al., 2019). However, if VOD recommendation systems are entirely personalized according to each user, the perception of serendipity in VOD interfaces is expected to be different between consumers according to their behavior. For example, a comprehensive user profile is expected to generate highly personalized recommendations with a lower perception of serendipity, as the preferences of the consumer are more clearly defined (Hallinan & Striphas, 2014; Nguyen et al., 2014).
      The term of perceived serendipity is used throughout this study, as it is impossible to uncover actual serendipity incorporated in the mysterious recommendation algorithms by VOD companies.  Moreover, this study examines the perception of serendipity by focusing on four consumer characteristics that affect the satisfaction of recommendation outcomes. The characteristics that are considered are: (1) binge-watch behavior, (2) knowledgeable users, (3) broad interest in genre, and (4) a need for uniqueness. Although more characteristics could be considered, due to limited space and time the focus is on four characteristics that presented with the best possible academic base. As established by Kotkov et al. (2018b), accuracy and serendipity are negatively correlated, and therefore, both concepts are used to construct hypotheses. 
      The sections below form four hypotheses regarding perceived serendipity according to the following consumer characteristics: the amount of time spent on VOD platforms, purposefully searching for content, wide range of genre preferences, and the users' need for uniqueness.

17.3.1 	2.3.1 Binge-watch behavior
	The binge-model is a strategy applied by VOD companies to create content, attract new consumers, and bind existing consumers (Jenner, 2015). Additionally, developing binge-watchable original content results in a more extended online presence of consumers within the platform. Consequently, when consumers spend more hours on VOD platforms or other online environments, it opens up the opportunity for VOD companies to gather data and increasingly build a more comprehensive user profile (Bozdag, 2015; Haim et al., 2018). Also, accurate recommendations increase consumer satisfaction that ensures loyalty towards the platform. In turn, consumers keep returning to the platform, which produces more data and even more sophisticated data (Hallinan & Striphas, 2014). An accurate user profile creates the possibility for recommendation algorithms to target consumer preferences effectively. 
	The hours a consumer spends watching content are reflected in the level of personalized recommendations (Maccatrozzo et al., 2017b). Nguyen et al. (2014, p. 683) investigated the accuracy of recommendation systems over 21 months. They concluded that 'the items recommended by the system and the items rated by users both became slightly narrower (less diverse) over time'. On a critical note, 'power-users' or users that solely consume particular content for binge-watch purposes, are less likely to make use of provided recommendations (Berry et al., 2011). 
      Following academic literature regarding the effects of binge-watch behavior on the accuracy of recommendation systems, the first hypothesis is stated: 
      H1: The number of hours spent on VOD platforms is negatively associated with perceiving serendipity

17.3.2 	2.3.2 Knowledgeable consumers
      From the moment consumers subscribe to VOD platforms, consumer data, such as click-through rates or click behavior, is gathered during their online presence that constructs a user profile (Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015). Before consuming TV content on VOD platforms, consumers are able to search for information to determine whether the content fits their preferences. To avoid the risk of choosing the wrong content, consumers gain knowledge on TV content through online information retrieval by, for example, checking the rating of a movie on IMDB8. Online activity is collected in the browsing history of the consumer and, as user profiles in VOD environments include the user browsing history, consumer information in user profiles is expanded (Grange, Benbasat & Burton-Jones, 2018). 
      When consumers are confronted with personalized recommendations, based on their user profile, they can either choose to follow provided recommendations or ignore them. Nguyen et al. (2014) established that recommendation-following users receive a better experience, as click behavior on VOD platforms contribute to the personalization process and the diversity in recommendations is increasingly in line with their preferences. However, as discussed by Xiao and Benbasat (2007), consumers who follow recommendations are presumably less knowledgeable about the content, and, therefore, more dependent on provided recommendations on platforms. Also, less knowledgeable consumers are less aware of their preferences and watch more popularized content, as popularized content is more familiar to these consumers (Zhang, Séaghdha, Quercia & Jambor, 2012). This leads to a broader range of matched content tags or more diverse recommendations. 
      Consumers gain knowledge on particular TV content through online reviews or offline channels, such as worth of mouth by their friends. Knowledgeable consumers ignore personalized recommendation, as they purposefully search for the content on platforms with established expectations (Xiao & Benbasat, 2007; Knijnenburg, Willemsen, Gantner, Soncu & Newell, 2012). Additionally, consumers with high product expertise are expected to have more defined and determined preferences and are less likely pleased with the provided recommendations. Therefore, knowledgeable consumers are less likely to be affected by recommendations and, instead, choose to ignore this service (Xiao & Benbasat, 2007; Goodman, Broniarczyk, Griffin & McAllister, 2013). 
      Although limited implicit and explicit data input constructs user profiles of knowledgeable consumers, as no additional actions or click behavior is tracked, VOD content is purposefully searched with the expectations of a preference match. Knowledgeable users reveal their established preferences in search or information terms and are, therefore, increasingly directly targeted. As the user profile of knowledgeable consumers is more coherent, it is expected that recommendations are more in line with user preferences and present less serendipity. Therefore, the second hypothesis is stated as follows: 
H2: Knowledge of content by users of VOD platforms is negatively associated with perceiving serendipity

      17.3.3 2.3.3 Broad interest in genre 
      Most VOD layouts are constructed through different tags that primarily suggest genre recommendations based on user preferences (Ricci et al., 2012). As established above, less knowledgeable consumers are not yet aware of their preferences and therefore match to a high number of content tags. Developing preferences and gaining knowledge overcomes decision difficulty as it narrows the recommended genres (Goodman et al., 2013). 
      However, consumers can prefer a broad and diverse range of genres regardless of their knowledge of particular content. Zhang et al. (2012) explored that listener diversity in music recommendations favour globally popular and well-known musicians. The study further explains that listener diversity is negatively correlated with the evaluation of recommendation accuracy. Moreover, as Maccatrozzo et al. (2017a) demonstrate, consumers with genre diversity in TV content in user profiles are encouraging the perception of serendipity in their recommendations. Given the data presented in academic literature, the following hypothesis is presented as:
      H3: Broad interest in genre is positively associated with perceiving serendipity
      17.3.4 2.3.4 Users' need for uniqueness
	Consumers in VOD environments are presented with genre diversity if their preferences are not well developed (Goodman et al., 2013). Additionally, genre diversity potentially occurs when consumers are in need of unique and niche items that increase the chance of matching a wide range of genre tags. Consumers' need for uniqueness 'drives individuals to pursue dissimilarity through consumption in an effort to develop a distinctive self and social image' (Ruvio, Shoham & Makovec Brenčič, 2008, p. 34). Tian, Bearden and Hunter (2001) conceptualize three behavioral dimensions to define consumers' need for uniqueness. First, creative choice counterconformity describes the selection of goods or products that socially differentiate them from others while maintaining social approval. Second, unpopular choice counterconformity explains the selection of unpopular items in dissent of particular norms within a social group to differentiate themselves and, therefore, risk disapproval from others. The last behavioral dimension of a consumers' need for uniqueness is the avoidance of similarity and refers to the loss of value or interest and obsolete of an owned product that becomes common and less unique. In essence, the desire to differentiate from others results in the consumption of unique, scarce, niche, and distinctive products (Snyder, 1992).
      As no relevant academic literature is available concerning the outcome of users' need for uniqueness in general personalized recommendation systems, a possible similar outcome of consumer characteristic is found in curiosity. Although curious consumers do not necessarily aim to be different, similarities are found in the search for niche products. Consumers without curiosity primally follow popularized recommendations and are therefore presented with similar and familiar content, such as blockbusters (Matt et al., 2014). On the contrary, curious consumers examined in a study by Chen et al. (2019) prefer unexpected recommendations and, in doing so, are increasingly satisfied with the perception of serendipitous content. To add, Maccatrozzo et al. (2017a, 2017b) examine whether serendipitous content in recommendations triggers curiosity in users. Both articles conclude that a high level of curiosity expands on the level of interesting and diverse content and, as a result, results in a high percentage of serendipitous items. 
	Although no academic literature is found that compares the consumer characteristics of consumers' need for uniqueness and curiosity, it is expected that both characteristics represent similar outcomes, as consumers with a need for uniqueness and curious consumers are both in search for unique items. Searching for unique items and following unique recommendations stimulates the recommendation of other unique and unfamiliar content and consequently increases the perception of serendipity (Matt et al., 2014). Accordingly, the fourth hypothesis is stated as follows: 
H4: Users' need for uniqueness is positively associated with perceiving serendipity
	
      17.3.5 2.3.5. User perception of VOD layouts
	According to Hayes (2017), a mediated model measures the direct and indirect effects between the predictor and the outcome. When applying Hayes' mediation model to this study, the direct effect of each particular consumer characteristics is measured on user satisfaction without the interference of the perception of serendipity. A negative or positive direct relation between the predictor and the outcome is similar to the negativity or positivity of the indirect relations with serendipity as mediator. No direct effects are expected between the consumer characteristics and the perception of VOD layouts, as the perception of VOD layouts is expected to be formed through the mediating variable of serendipity. However, the direct effects between the consumer characteristics and users' perception of VOD layouts are measured to draw conclusions on mediating effects (Hayes, 2017). Therefore, the following four hypotheses are stated:

H5a: The number of hours spent on VOD platforms relates negatively to users' perceptions of VOD layouts
H5b: Knowledge of content by users of VOD platforms relates negatively to users' perceptions of VOD layouts
H5c: Broad interest in genre relates positively to users' perceptions of VOD layouts
H5d: Users' need for uniqueness relates positively to users' perceptions of VOD layouts


17.4 	2.4 Serendipity
      In this study, serendipity acts as a mediator. The perception of serendipity depends on consumer characteristics that construct user profiles. Subsequently, the level of user satisfaction is dependent on the level of serendipity based on consumer characteristics. Therefore, evaluating the level of perceived serendipity by a user is a subjective task (Maccatrozzo et al., 2017b). Silveira et al. (2019) confirm the subjective essence and underline the user-dependent nature of serendipity since user information, such as browsing history, is required to form recommendations. 
      This thesis follows the serendipity definition and measurements according to Kotkov et al. (2018a, 2018b) with three components: novelty, unexpectedness, and relevance. These dimensions are indisputably connected to one other, as explained below.

17.4.1 	2.4.1 Novelty
      According to Kotkov et al. (2018b), novelty in recommendations refers to unknown items for users prior to the recommendation. Usually, novel items are unpopular and deviate from user profiles to reduce the chance of familiarity. In line with Kotkov et al. (2018b), Matt et al. (2014, p. 4) explain that 'novelty measures whether recommended items are already known to distinct users or a community as a whole. At the same time, novel recommendations should not consist of obvious items'. Silveira et al. (2019) recognize three levels of novelty. The first level is life level novelty and represents an unknown item in the life of the user. Second, system level novelty refers to novel items considering the browser and consumption history of the user. Lastly, on a recommendation list level, novelty occurs when items are new in personalized recommendations. Level three is an extension of level two where recommendation systems deny repeated recommendations and therefore considered too extreme. However, the system level novelty is, unlike the life level novelty, traceable by the recommendation system and proven to contribute to user satisfaction in recommendation platforms. 
      On a critical note, novelty in recommendations should consider whether consumers are able to cope with a certain level of novelty (Maccatrozzo et al. 2017b). A high level of novelty without the implementation of other serendipity dimensions weakens the match between the preferences and the recommended item. Hence, the enjoyment of perceiving novel items is not achieved (Matt et al., 2014). However, the right balance of novelty in the context of serendipity is expected to positively improve the perception of recommendation environments (Matt et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2019). Naturally following from previous literature, the following hypothesis is stated: 
      H6a: Novelty in the context of serendipity relates positively to users' perceptions of VOD layouts

17.4.2 	2.4.2 Unexpectedness
      The article by Silveira, Fernando Mourão and Gonçalves (2017, p. 1662) describe unexpectedness in recommendation systems as 'avoiding obvious recommendations of items expected to be consumed, aiming to reduce boring and irrelevant recommendations to users'. Moreover, unexpected items deviate from preferences derived from user profiles to ensure the dissimilarity of accurate recommendations (Kotkov et al., 2018b). Unexpectedness or surprising recommended items differ from the expectations of consumers; however, these items are not necessarily novel or relevant (Kaminskas & Bridge, 2014). Chen et al. (2019) point out the difficulty in the measurement of the unexpected element in serendipity, as the first reaction of consumers in encountering an unexpected item is the emotion of surprise. Surprises have the possibility to be unpleasant as well. Only by combining other factors, such as novelty and relevance, a level of serendipity is induced and creates the goal that strives for user satisfaction. Including the dimension of unexpectedness in the concept of serendipity contributes to successfully perceived serendipitous recommendations and increased user satisfaction (Silveira et al., 2017). Consequently, the following hypothesis is formed: 
      H6b: Unexpectedness in the context of serendipity relates positively to users' perceptions of VOD layouts

17.4.3 	2.4.3 Relevance
      Relevance or utility items refer to items that predicted or ensured to fit users' preferences. Explicitly, users indicate relevant items with ratings where, for example, three out of five stars is considered to be relevant. As Netflix already disregarded the rating system that contributed to user profiles, recommendation algorithms are structured to measure the relevance of items in an implicit manner. For instance, items are considered relevant when a certain percentage of content is consumed (Kotkov et al., 2018b). Consequently, relevance reflects the level of value that users attach to recommendations and, therefore, is considered to relate closely to the taste and preferences of consumers (Silveira et al., 2019). 
      Providing solely accurate recommendations increases homogeneous content and decreases relevance, as the input of data is based on similar recommendations and content (Chaney et al., 2018). However, relevant items 'is the main need the users have, since they want recommender systems to suggest useful items according to their tastes' (Silveira et al., 2019, p. 826). Including relevant items in recommendation systems is necessary. Nonetheless, recommendations present familiar and expected content without consideration of the other serendipity dimensions. Hence, recommending relevant items in the context of serendipity contributes to a positive perception of platform environments (Saat et al., 2018).
      H6c: Relevance in the context of serendipity relates positively to users' perceptions of VOD layouts
	Again, the coherence between the three components of serendipity is underlined. When a consumer is presented with serendipitous recommendation items, the recommendation system provides a novel, relevant, and unexpected item. This study tests the three components separately to uncover the level of each element, and therefore, the balance of novelty, relevancy, and unexpectedness in serendipitous items. 



      17.5 2.5 Conceptual framework




Figure 1. Conceptual Framework
      

18 
3. METHOD
	
      The following chapter discusses the methodological approach of this thesis. This research aims to investigate the outlined hypotheses as described in the previous section. In the first part of this chapter, the quantitative nature of the research method is analyzed. Secondly, the research design is developed as an online survey with a quasi-experiment. This section clarifies the survey structure and stimulus that collects the data from a sample. Thirdly, the descriptive statistics are discussed to illustrate the sample. Fourthly, the research design and mediated approach are further analyzed with an in-depth operationalization of all considered research variables. Lastly, reliability and validity are discussed. 

      18.1 3.1 Methodological approach
      The goal of this research is to analyze the effect of particular consumer characteristics on their perception of VOD layout through the mediated aspect of serendipity. Depending on the consumer characteristics, the perception of serendipity changes, and therefore, the perception of VOD layouts change. In short, this study follows a mediated path. 
      In mediated research, 'the goal is to empirically quantify and test hypothesis about the contingent nature of the mechanisms by which X exerts its influence on Y' (Hayes, 2017, p. viii). Therefore, a quantitative approach is formulated to ensure the research is conducted correctly and concisely. Moreover, the structured and objective nature of quantitative research improves the reliability of this study (Matthews & Ross, 2010). 

      18.2 3.2 Research design
      The research design is shaped with an online survey including a quasi-experiment using the research software Qualtrics. The survey is distributed by the researcher and completed by the participant through online platforms to reach the right target group: the online consumers of VOD platforms. 
      Distributing online surveys regarding the topic of serendipity in recommender systems and including a specific type of experiment is common in academic literature (Maccatrozzo et al., 2017a; Kotkov et al., 2018a; Chen et al., 2019). Maccatrozzo et al. (2017a) constructed a controlled experiment using a survey that measures the relation of curiosity and their response to serendipitous recommendations. The study by Kotkov et al. (2018a) and Chen et al. (2019) distribute online surveys through an extensive database to uncover the perception of serendipity. In the article by Kotkov et al. (2018a), participants are asked, alongside the serendipity scales, to rate the level of satisfaction regarding the recommended content with a maximum of five stars. The participants of the research by Kotkov et al. (2018a) prove to be willing to share their opinion on TV shows and movies in a survey format. Moreover, Chen et al. (2019) conduct the online survey method to measure the moderation effect of curiosity between serendipity as predictor and user satisfaction as an outcome. Both articles prove that the online survey method is the appropriate research method to measure the perception of serendipity and its mediated aspect in this study. 
      An advantage of gathering data using online surveys is the possibility of generalizing the data of the sample to a larger population. Moreover, by means of online distribution and easy access to the survey, the potential is created to reach participants on a global level in a short time. Including a quasi-experiment in the survey creates the opportunity to gather data in a natural situation (Matthews & Ross, 2010). For the presented survey, the Netflix interface and recommendation rows are simulated to create a natural experience of browsing through suggested content.
      The survey presented in this study (Appendix A) uses statements demonstrated in the studies by Kotkov et al. (2018a), Chen et al. (2019), and Ruvio et al. (2008). The statements presented by Kotkov et al. (2018a) and Chen et al. (2019) are used and adapted to construct the serendipity scale. The statements by Ruvio et al. (2008) uncovers the level of need for uniqueness by the participant. 
      
      18.2.1 3.2.1 Survey structure
      The survey presented in Appendix A is constructed of seven parts. In the first part, an introduction to the topic of the study and informed consent is presented. Moreover, the first part elaborates on the participation requirements: the participant is a subscriber of at least one VOD platform and is in possession of their own user profile of a VOD platform without the interference of others. In the second part of the survey, items 1a and 1b, are presented as control variables (§3.4.4) to ensure the participant meets the requirements. Additionally, item 1d, the participants' most-used VOD platform, is incorporated in all relevant statements according to the 'Pipe Text - Selected Choices' option in Qualtrics. Before continuing to the third part, a definition of recommendations is introduced to ensure all participants understand the following statements in the serendipity scale of their most-used VOD platform (part three). Fourth, consumer characteristics are uncovered according to the four researched components: hours spent on VOD platforms, the level of knowledge, diversity in genre interest, and the need for uniqueness. Next, the stimulus (§3.2.2) is displayed for at least 30 seconds before entering the fifth part of the survey: the serendipity scale based on the stimulus. The sixth part of the survey retrieves the demographic information of the participant. Lastly, a closing message is presented. The scales and variables presented in this survey are in-depth elaborated in §3.4.     

      18.2.2 3.2.2 Stimulus
      The fifth part of the survey (Appendix A: Stimulus) is a quasi-experiment with a 100% serendipity stimulus. In quasi-experiments, two or more differentiating groups are identified and exposed to a situation in a natural manner (Matthews & Ross, 2010). The survey presented in this research identifies four different groups based on their consumer characteristics. A natural situation is created by recreating the layout of the most popular VOD platform, Netflix. Other platforms, such as Disney+ and Amazon Video Prime, display a similar layout with the representation of genre rows. Created with the design software program Indesign, all presented recommendations are images extracted from a Google search (Appendix B) accompanied by imaginary titles created by the researcher. Hence, all recommendations are new to each participant. Moreover, the designed recommendations in the stimulus aim to suggest diversity in genres, ethnicities, style, and presentation. 
      In the stimulus, five different genre rows are constructed that resemble popular and personalized genre rows. The popularized rows are described as: 'popular', 'trending', and 'top 10 in the Netherlands'. Including popularized rows in the stimulus with familiar actors and current similar popular content from May 2020 increases the credibility and relevancy of the stimulus. For example, 'Animal Kingdom' and 'Kobe Bryant', both displayed in genre row 'Top 10 in the Netherlands', refer to the popular Netflix documentaries of 'Tiger King' and 'The Last Dance' (Shaw, 2020) respectively. The personalized recommendation rows 'Recommended for you' and 'Because you watched Friends' directly address the participant and aim to evoke the participants with an emotion based on their consumer characteristics. 'Friends' is chosen as it is a top-streamed TV show (Lee, 2019) on the most used VOD platform, Netflix (Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015), and, therefore, most likely that the participants have watched one or more episode. Either the participant feels that the recommendations are suggesting interesting, relevant, and surprising content, or the recommendations are perceived as misplaced and incorrect. 

Figure 2. Stimulus.

      18.2.3 3.2.3 Data collection
      Before distributing the survey (Appendix A), a pre-test was conducted to improve the flow of the overall survey and ensure the right interpretation of all statements and questions. Performing a pre-test increases the reliability of the study (Pallant, 2016). After each pre-test, conducted by seven female and five male participants, the participant and the researcher discussed possible occurred issues. The participants of the pre-test suggested some slight changes, such as incorporating the meaning of recommendations and rewriting statements. A description of recommendations within your VOD layout proved to be essential, as no participant was aware that all perceived content could be described as a recommendation. Most of the participants searched for the 'Recommended for you' recommendation row to answer the serendipity scale regarding their most used VOD platform. Moreover, a timer is set with the display of the stimulus. Participants during the pre-test expressed that they easily forgot the provided recommendations. Setting a timer during the perception of the stimulus enables the participant to closely look at the provided recommendation for at least 30 seconds. Also, to increase the reliability of the serendipity scale regarding the perception of 100% serendipity, the stimulus is displayed once more with the serendipity scale (Appendix A: Stimulus). Last, the nationality of the participant, item 5c, is added to the demographic questions to increase the information of the participated population.
      Once all the detected problems were resolved, the final version of the survey (Appendix A), constructed with Qualtrics, was distributed through convenience sampling. Convenience sampling 'is a type of nonprobability or nonrandom sampling where members of the target population that meet certain practical criteria, such as easy accessibility, [...] are included for the purpose of the study' (Etikan, Musa & Alkassim, 2016, p. 2). A disadvantage of convenience sampling is the probability of a biased sample, such as the overrepresentation of female participants. During the distribution of the survey, a high participation level of females (71%) compared to male participants (29%) was represented. Therefore, female participation was excluded for one day by creating an entry requirement on the platforms Surveyswap and Surveycircle. The other requirements to participate in the survey, items 1a and 1b that exclude nonusers of VOD platforms and participants without their own user profile (Appendix A: Filter and Control variables), are presented in the introduction and the first section. 
      During the last two weeks of May 2020, the respondents were recruited through various platforms, such as LinkedIn, Whatsapp, Surveyswap, and Surveycircle. Together with the Qualtrics link, a short description of the survey purpose, requirements, and duration presented the invitation to the survey. For the distribution through Whatsapp, a snowball effect sampling method is performed by contacting friends of friends by the researcher. Although snowball sampling is embedded with limitations, such as the lack of control over the sample and a possible sample bias by selecting similar participants (Biernacki & Waldorf, 1981), snowball sampling is found appropriate to test theoretical models for a short period (Calder, Philips & Tybout, 1981).
	The target sample size is abstracted from the study by Kotkov et al. (2018a). Here, the serendipity scale was distributed to 2305 users with 475 respondents that completed all questions and statements. However, due to the short distribution time of the survey presented in this research (Appendix A) and the lack of an extensive distribution database, the target sample size is adjusted to a more manageable sample size. According to Tabachnick and Fidell (2013), the formula for the required sample size in quantitative research is N > 50 +8m, where' represents all independent variables. The four consumer characteristics and three mediating variables are included in the equation. All combined, it results in a target sample size of N > 106.

      18.3 3.3 Descriptive statistics
	In total, 386 participants opened the survey. Out of 386 participants, 50 participants did not complete the entire survey. Approximately half of these unfinished participants stopped at the filter questions regarding the consumption of VOD platforms and ownership of their own user profile. The other half of the unfinished participants stopped at other moments in the survey. Forty participants did not meet the requirements and answered item 1a or 1b (Appendix A) with 'no'. Another six participants were excluded from the dataset as a completion time below three minutes is considered too fast. Participants with a completion time between three and 4.5 minutes are scrutinized to ensure the participant did not select the same option continually. No participants with a survey duration between three and 4.5 minutes are excluded. After data cleaning, the usable dataset is established at 290 participants.  

      18.3.1 3.3.1 Descriptive statistics: respondents
	Table 1 and table 2 (Appendix. C) present the descriptive statistics gender, education level, and nationality of the sample. The variable age is stated as a number in an open text box. The age of the participants ranged from 18 to 82, with M = 28.82, SD = 11.54. 
      For the variable gender, participants had the option to select: 'female', 'male', 'prefer not to say' and 'other'. The last option was provided with an open text and enabled the participant to specify. One participant selected the option 'prefer not to say' and one participant specified the variable gender in the open text box when the option 'other' was selected. Furthermore, female participants represent 174 (60.0%) of the sample, leaving 114 (39.3%) male participants. The descriptive statistics regarding the variable gender are presented in table 1. 
      The nationality of the participant is asked by selecting a pre-made Qualtrics selection option that includes all nationalities across the world. The majority of the sample, 193, is Dutch (66.6%), followed by 22 participants from the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (7.6%) and 20 participants from Germany (6.9%). The full list of countries is presented in Appendix C: table 2. 
      For the demographic question regarding the highest completed education, two groups represent the majority of the sample, namely 99 participants completed a bachelor's degree (34.1%) and 94 participants completed a master's degree (32.4%). Other participants completed high school (16.2%), higher professional education (10.3%), and secondary vocational education (4.5%). One participant did not complete an education (0.3%). The number and percentage of participants of each group regarding the highest completed education are displayed in table 1. 

Table 1: Descriptive statistics: gender and highest completed education with N = 290
VariableNumber of participantsPercentage of participantsGender
Female
Male
Prefer not to say
Other
174
114
1
1
60.0%
39.3%
0.3%
0.3%Highest completed education
No education
High school graduate
Secondary vocational education (MBO)
Higher Professional education (HBO)
Bachelor's degree
Master's degree
Doctorate/PhD
1
47
13
30
99
94
6
0.3%
16.2%
4.5%
10.3%
34.1%
32.4%
2.1%	
      18.3.2 3.3.2 Descriptive statistics: VOD platforms
	As expected from previous literature (Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015), Netflix is the most used VOD platform amongst the sample. For item 1c, questioning on which VOD platforms the participants have their own user profile, multiple answers could be selected. 276 out of the 290 participants (95.2%) answered 'Netflix' for item 1c, as one of the VOD platforms where they possess their own user profile. Videoland (25.2%), Amazon Prime Video (17.2%), and Disney+ (14.5%) are other popular VOD platforms amongst the sample. Furthermore, the majority of 249 (85.9%) participants selected Netflix as the most-used VOD platform. The second most used VOD platform amongst the sample is Videoland with 5.2%. The statistics of item 1c and item 1d are found in table 3.

 Table 3: Descriptive statistics: item 1c and item 1d with N = 290
VariableNumber of participantsPercentage of participantsItem 1c. On which VOD platforms do you have your own user profile?Netflix
Disney+
Amazon Prime Video
Apple TV 
Hulu
Videoland
Ziggo Movies and Series
NPO start
Film 1
Other276
42
50
18
4
73
18
31
1
1895.2%
14.5%
17.2%
6.2%
1.4%
25.2%
6.2%
10.7%
0.3%
6.2%Item 1d. What is your most used VOD platform where you have your own user profile?Netflix
Disney+
Amazon Prime Video
Apple TV 
Hulu
Videoland
Ziggo Movies and Series
NPO start
Film 1
Other249
4
8
2
1
15
1
8
0
285.9%
1.4%
2.8%
0.7%
0.3%
5.2%
0.3%
2.8%
0%
0.7%

      18.4 3.4 Variables and reliability
      As displayed in the conceptual framework (figure 1), a mediation model is presented in this study. The consumer characteristics (X) act as predictors, serendipity (M) acts as the mediator and user perception of VOD layouts (Y) is the outcome. All components of the meditation model are explained below. 
      
      18.4.1 3.4.1 Consumer characteristics
      In this study, four consumer characteristics are considered that affect user profiles and the perception of serendipity on VOD platforms. As described in the theoretical framework, all four characteristics are related to user profiles within recommendation platforms. Other consumer characteristics, such as curiosity (Maccatrozzo et al., 2017a), are applicable in this study. However, due to the limited research scope and time, the focus is on the four presented characteristics. 
      
      18.4.1.1 The number of hours spent on VOD platforms
      The first hypothesis discusses the number of hours spent by the consumer on their chosen platforms. To measure hours as a continuous variable, the consumer is asked to fill out an open text box that explains the number of hours the consumer spent on their chosen platform per week on average. Adding the phrase 'no judgment' and including a wink emoticon stimulates the participant to answer honestly. The predicting variable of hours varies from spending half an hour per week on VOD content on average to 48 hours with M = 8.58 hours, SD = 6.58. 

      18.4.1.2 Knowledgeable consumers
      The second hypothesis presented of consumer characteristics is the knowledge of consumers. Knowledgeable consumers are defined by four criteria in five statements on a five-point Likert scale, anchored by 'strongly disagree', 'disagree', 'neither agree nor disagree', 'agree' and 'strongly agree'. The four criteria of knowledgeable consumers in this study are: (1) doing research through offline or online channels before watching content, (2) ignoring provided recommendations on VOD platforms, (3) purposefully searching for content, and (4) developed TV show/movie preferences. To uncover the knowledge level of the participant, five statements are formulated regarding the agreement of each criterion. Additionally, for the second criteria, ignoring provided recommendations, a supplementary statement is added to ensure that the participant understands the question correctly. The first question of the second criterion, item 3b1, is formulated in a negative manner: 'I never follow provided recommendations on [answer 1d]'. The question the second question of the second criteria, item 3b1: 'When I want to watch TV shows/movies, I look through the recommendations on [answer 1d] before I make a decision' is added for clarity and control. All questions regarding the participant's knowledge of VOD content are presented in Appendix A: Consumer Characteristics (b). 
      To test the reliability of the created knowledgeable consumer scale according to previous literature, a Cronbach's alpha test is conducted considering all five statements. However, as the reliability of all five statements is presented with a low level of internal consistency (α = .04), factor analysis is conducted to find underlying components within the consumer knowledge scale (table 4). Using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotations based on Eigenvalues (>1.00), KMO = .58, χ2 (N = 290, 10) = 104.62 p < .001. Two factors are found explaining a variance of 54.9% of the total. Although the KMO is established slightly below .60, the factor analysis is continued (Pett, Lackey & Sullivan, 2003). The first factor is described as established preferences and refers to the third and fourth criteria, purposefully searching for content and developed TV shows/movie preferences, respectively. The factor 'established preferences' is characterized by the well-developed preferences and well-established knowledge consumers have before the consumption of VOD content. 34.0% explained the variance with questionable reliability of α = .58. The second factor is identified as information retrieval and includes items 3b3, 3b4, and 3b5 of the knowledgeable consumer scale. Information retrieval refers to the action's consumers undertake before watching content on VOD platforms. The variance explained is 20.9% with a reliability of α = -.29. This level of reliability is too low to be considered in the knowledgeable consumer scale (DeVellis, 2003).
      Moreover, reverse coding the third item did not improve the reliability of the factor. A possible explanation of the low reliability of the second factor is the lack of clarity regarding the question. Three statements are excluded to improve the overall reliability of the full knowledgeable consumer scale and aim for the highest possible reliability level. By deleting item 3b3, 3b4 and 3b5, the highest level of reliability is set at α = .58. The findings indicate a low reliability level; however, as discussed in Bernardi (1994), 'a low Cronbach's alpha does not immediately put the results of the analysis into question'. Moreover, Griethuijsen, van Eijck, Haste, den Brok, Skinner, Mansour, ... BouJaoude (2014) argue that a Cronbach's alpha ranged between α = .45 and α = .98 is described as acceptable. Although the internal consistency is not ideal (α < .70) according to DeVellis (2003), the remaining two statements, items 3b1 and 3b2, are formed to represent the predicting variable of knowledgeable consumers. 
      To prepare the predicting variable of knowledgeable consumers for the mediation model, a new variable is created, calculating the mean of knowledgeable consumers for each participant. 

Table 4. Factor analysis of knowledgeable consumers scale with N = 290.
ItemsEstablished preferencesInformation retrievalWhen I open [answer 1d], I know exactly what kind of TV shows/movies I prefer.86
When I open [answer 1d], I know exactly what I want to watch.80When I want to watch TV shows/movies, I look through the recommendations on [answer 1d] before I make a decision. -.72I never follow provided recommendations on [answer 1d].77Before watching TV shows/movies on [answer 1d] I do research to find out if it is worth watching.36Reliabilityα = .58α = -.29Variance Explained34.0%20.9%      
      
18.4.1.3 	Broad genre interest 
      The third hypothesis concerns the effect of a broad genre interest on the perception of serendipity and user satisfaction. For the purpose of this hypothesis, the participants are asked which genres they are interested in, and providing them with 17 genre options uncovers the number of interested genres. The genre options are mostly added on and derived from Statista Research Department (2019; 2020a). Also, the possibility of selecting 'other' is provided with a textbox. This enables the participant to choose genre preferences that are not presented in the provided options. All genre options, such as 'action', 'comedy', and 'mystery' are presented in Appendix A: Consumer Characteristics (c).
      To prepare the predicting variable broad genre interest for the mediation model, a new variable is created. This new variable represents the total of all selected genre options for each participant.  
      
18.4.1.4 	Users' need for uniqueness
      Finally, the users' need for uniqueness is analyzed according to the short-form users' need for uniqueness scale by Ruvio et al. (2008). The questionnaire developed by Ruvio et al. (2008) is chosen over the 31-item long questionnaire by Tian et al. (2001), as the scale by Ruvio et al. (2008) provides a shortened questionnaire based on Tian et al. (2001). A shorter survey with fewer questions increases the overall completion rate of the survey (Matthews & Ross, 2010). The users' need for uniqueness scale by Ruvio et al. (2008) presents twelve statements regarding the consumption and ownership of fashion products and brands. Ruvio et al. (2008) present four elements of the consumers' need for uniqueness scale: creative choice, unpopular choice, avoidance of similarity, and unique consumption behavior. The last element, unique consumption behavior, was especially used for the study by Ruvio et al. (2008) and therefore excluded in this survey (Appendix A). Moreover, six of twelve statements by Ruvio et al. (2008) do not adequately adapt to the context of VOD markets and are excluded from the questionnaire. The other six statements were indicated as relevant and included in the survey used in this study (Appendix A). To illustrate, the second item by Ruvio et al. (2008, p. 53) is excluded, as it states: 'I often try to find a more interesting version of run-of-the-mill products because I enjoy being original'. In the context of fashion products and brands, this statement is applicable as popular fashion items and seasonal trends are replicated to meet the needs of fashion consumers. However, replicating TV shows or movies is less common due to strict copyright policies (Towse, 2010). As Ruvio et al. (2008) did not present possible answering options for the participant, all six remaining statements are answered on a five-point Likert scale, anchored by 'strongly disagree' to 'strongly agree', corresponding to the study by Tian et al. (2001). The full users' need for uniqueness scale used in this study is displayed in Appendix A: Consumer Characteristics (d).
	As six of twelve statements are excluded from the users' need for uniqueness scale by Ruvio et al. (2008), a factor analysis is conducted to test whether the three factors of creative choice, unpopular choice, and avoidance of similarity, are represented in the shortened scale presented in this study (Appendix A: Consumer characteristics (d)). Using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotations based on Eigenvalues (>1.00), KMO = .74, χ2 (N = 290, 15) = 814.72 p < .001. The KMO value is recorded above 0.60 and the Bartlett's test of Sphericity is statistically significant. Therefore, the factor analysis is continued. A variance of 75.0% of the total is explained through two factors: avoidance of similarity and creative/unpopular choice. The internal consistency is accepted at α = .86 and α = .80, respectively (DeVillis, 2003). As presented in table 5, two components of the users' need for uniqueness scale are combined, namely creative choice and unpopular choice. Seemingly, the distinction between both components is not represented enough in the survey (Appendix A). Although the statements are excluded for a reason, namely the ability to adapt properly to the VOD market, future research should consider including more statements regarding unpopular choice. 
	After establishing the components of the users' need for uniqueness scale by Ruvio et al. (2008) is comparable to the scale used in this study (Appendix A: Consumer characteristics (d)), the reliability is checked. The users' need for uniqueness scale of this study, representing six statements, recorded a Cronbach's α = .81. A Cronbach's alpha at the level of .81 means that the full users' need for uniqueness scale is reliable and acceptable (DeVillis, 2003). To prepare the predicting variable of users' need for uniqueness for the mediation model, a new variable is created, calculating the mean of the users' need for uniqueness scale for each participant. 

Table 5. Factor analysis of users' need for uniqueness scale with N = 290. 
ItemsAvoidance of SimilarityCreative/Unpopular choiceThe more common a TV show/movie is among the general population, the less interested I am in watching it..91
I often try to avoid TV shows/movies that I know are watched by the general population..90When a TV show/movie I watch(ed) becomes popular among the general public, I begin to value it less..80Having an eye for TV shows/movies that are interesting and unusual assists me in establishing a distinctive image..84I actively seek to develop my personal uniqueness by watching unique and special TV shows/movies..87I enjoy challenging the prevailing taste of people I know by watching something they would not seem to accept..77Reliabilityα = 0.86α = 0.80Variance explained51.6%23.4%

      18.4.2 3.4.2 Serendipity
      In this study, the mediating variable between consumer characteristics and user perception of VOD layouts is serendipity. Measuring of the mediating variable is performed according to the serendipity scale presented by Kotkov et al. (2018a). The survey by Kotkov et al. (2018a) on recommendations of MovieLens introduces eight statements regarding the three dimensions of serendipity (novelty, unexpectedness, and relevance), satisfaction, and preference broadening (§3.4.3). All statements by Kotkov et al. (2018a) were subjected to slight changes to fit the purpose of this study. 
      In the eight-item questionnaire by Kotkov et al. (2018a), the serendipity elements of unexpectedness and relevance are examined as a combined component. Also, Kotkov et al. (2018a) solely asked the participant to fill in the survey regarding relevant content, implying that the relevancy of provided recommendations is already established. Contrary to Kotkov et al. (2018a), this survey (Appendix A) examines the element of relevance separately by adding item 2.7 and 4.7. These items state that the recommended TV shows and movies are relevant for the participant. Moreover, the items 2.4 and 4.4 are shortened to a one-sentence statement, as both items introduced in the questionnaire of Kotkov et al. (2018a) presented a double statement. Presenting one clear statement improves the capability of the participant to understand each statement correctly. Adding clarity enhances the reliability of the answers given by the participants. 
      The adapted version of the serendipity scale by Kotkov et al. (2018a) is included twice in the overall survey of this research. At the beginning of the survey (Appendix A: Serendipity), the participant is asked to look at, or think about, the provided recommendations on their most-used VOD platform that they selected in filter question 1d. The first serendipity scale incorporates their most used VOD platform in all nine statements and, therefore, refers directly to the platform with the most established user profile. After the participant is exposed to the stimulus of 100% serendipity (figure 2), the adapted serendipity scale by Kotkov et al. (2018a) is introduced again. This second serendipity scale refers to the displayed recommendations in the stimulus. In line with Kotkov et al. (2018a), all statements are tested according to the level of agreement on a five-point Likert scale ('strongly disagree' to 'strongly agree'). Both serendipity scales are found in Appendix A Serendipity and Stimulus. 
      A factor analysis is conducted to uncover whether the three components of the serendipity scale presented in Kotkov et al. (2018a) resemble the underlying factors in the serendipity scale of this study. The seven items, item 2.1 till item 2.7, representing the adapted serendipity scale by Kotkov et al. (2018a) refer to the perception of serendipity in existing VOD layouts and are entered into factor analysis. Using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1.00), KMO = .67, χ2 (N = 290, 21) = 379.09, p < .001. The factor analysis is continued, as the KMO value is presented above 0.60 and the Bartlett's test of Sphericity is statistically significant (Pett et al., 2003). 
	Explaining 56.8% of the variance in the first serendipity scale, two factors are found above an Eigenvalue of 1. The two factors are presented as novelty/unexpectedness and relevance. The two factor loadings of the individual items are displayed in table 6. Contrary to Kotkov et al. (2018a), this study combines the factors novelty and unexpectedness, as no distinct difference is presented in the underlying constructs. As a consequence, two mediating variables, novelty/unexpectedness and relevance, are presented in the model (figure 4), instead of three mediating variables. 
	The reliability of both factors is slightly under the preferable α ≥ .70 (DeVellis, 2003), as novelty/unexpectedness recorded a Cronbach's α = 0.67 and Relevance α = 0.68. Deleting statements did not improve internal consistency. Therefore, components novelty/unexpectedness and relevance are accepted at the previously indicated Cronbach's alpha. A Cronbach's alpha between α > .65 and α < .70 is minimally accepted (Cohen, Manion & Morrison, 2018). 
	Performing a factor analysis on the serendipity after the stimulus is inadvisable, as the participants could be biased by the perception of the first serendipity scale. Therefore, the same factors, novelty/unexpectedness and relevance, are used in the second mediation model (figure 5) after the perception of the stimulus.



Table 6. Factor analysis of the serendipity scale with N = 290. 
ItemsNovelty/UnexpectednessRelevanceThe recommendations on [answer 1d] are different (e.g., in style, genre, topic) from the TV shows/movies I usually watch..82
I am surprised by the TV shows/movies on [answer 1d] that are recommended to me..74The recommendations on [answer 1d] suggest TV shows/movies that I have never heard of..64The recommendations on [answer 1d] are TV shows/movies I would not normally discover on my own..62I enjoy recommended TV shows/movies on [answer 1d]..81The recommendations on [answer 1d] suggest TV shows/movies that are relevant for me..78The recommendations on [answer 1d] influence my decisions to watch TV shows/movies..74Reliabilityα = 0.67α = 0.68Variance Explained32.2%24.5%      
      
      18.4.3 3.4.3 User perception of VOD layouts
      Measuring user satisfaction as an outcome for the effectiveness of recommendation systems is widely used in different academic articles (Häubl & Trifts, 2000); Knijnenburg et al., 2012; Ekstrand, Maxwell Harper, Willemsen & Konstan, 2014; Yu et al., 2017; Kotkov et al., 2018a; Chen et al., 2019; Silveira et al., 2019). Moreover, in line with Kotkov et al. (2018a) and Chen et al. (2019), the user perception of recommendations is measured according to user satisfaction. Applying the measurement of user satisfaction enables recommendation environments to test the performance of their recommendation service and compare the effectiveness of, for example, algorithmic changes after implementation.
      The study by Kotkov et al. (2018a, p. 1345) includes the component of user satisfaction in their eight statements by stating: 'I am glad I watched this movie'. This statement suggests testing user satisfaction on serendipitous before and after consumption. However, the survey presented in this study (Appendix A) solely considers the perception of serendipity before consumption. Asking participants to fill in a new survey concerning user satisfaction after consumption of serendipitous items is not feasible in this study due to lack of time and space, and, therefore, the measurement of user satisfaction is adapted according to the study of Chen et al. (2019). Chen et al. (2019, p. 244) suggest a direct approach by stating: 'I am satisfied with this recommendation'. Combining both statements from the study by Kotkov et al. (2018a) and Chen et al. (2019), resulting in item 2.8 and 4.8, provides clear expectations for the participant.
      Two new variables are created to prepare both outcome variables for the first and second mediation model. The new variable for the first mediation model calculates the mean of user satisfaction (item 2.8) for each participant. The second created variable, included in the second mediation model, calculates the mean of user satisfaction (item 4.8) of each participant after the perception of the stimulus
      Moreover, Kotkov et al. (2018a) introduce the statement regarding preference broadening. Preference broadening is an effect of the implementation of serendipitous items, as consumers are exposed to unfamiliar content that might be interesting and relevant (Kotkov et al., 2018a). Again, in the article by Kotkov et al. (2018), the statement regarding preference broadening is answered through the participant's level of agreement on a five-point Likert scale ('strongly disagree' to 'strongly agree') after the consumption of MovieLens recommendations. Although preferences broadening is not included in the hypotheses of this research, an adapted statement by Kotkov et al. (2018a) presented as item 2.9 and 4.9 (Appendix) possibly uncovers preference broadening expressed before the recommended content consumption. Future research could include preferences broadening based on consumer characteristics, such as the knowledge of consumers, as another outcome of the performance of recommendation systems. 
      
      18.4.4 3.4.4 Control variables
	To control the distribution of a represented population, demographic variables are included that represent the participants' age, nationality, gender, and education level. The demographic variables act as control variables in the mediation regression to address possible confounding factors. The confounding factors are included to regulate the distortion of the effects between the predictors, mediators, and the outcome. To illustrate, the nationality of the participant affects the perception of serendipitous items, which is explained by the fact that the catalog of VOD platforms is different for each country (Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015). 
	To prepare the control variables for the mediation model according to Hayes (2017) in section §4.2 and §4.3, the demographic variables of gender and nationality are recoded in binary dummy variables. First, the dummy variable gender distinguishes two groups: female and not female. 'Female' represents female participants and encompasses the largest group in the demographic variable gender. The group 'not female' includes all male participants and participants that selected the option 'prefer not to say' or 'other'. Second, the dummy variable nationality differentiates 'Dutch' and 'non-Dutch', as a large group selected the option 'Dutch' as their nationality (66.6%). All other nationalities are included in the group 'non-Dutch'. Additionally, the demographic variable age is not recoded, as continuous variables are accepted as covariates in the mediation model (Hayes, 2017). Last, education level is excluded from the mediation model because this demographic variable is unable to be recoded in a continuous or binary dummy variable. 
      Moreover, items 1a and 1b test whether the participant meets the criteria to act as a valid respondent. Item 1a (Appendix A) states 'Are you a user of at least one Video-on-demand (VOD) platform?'. Answering this question with 'yes' informs the researcher that the participant encompasses enough knowledge on VOD platforms to answer all following questions and statements. For the next item, item 1b (Appendix A), the following question is asked: 'Do you have a user profile on a VOD platform where you are the only consumer?'. This question indicates whether the user profile of their VOD platform attracts data solely on their interactions without the interference of users with possible different consumer characteristics. Interference of other users within a user profile changes the preference match towards a broader range and, therefore, the relevancy of recommended content. Accordingly, the perception of serendipity is higher than anticipated by recommendation systems. The image (figure 3) presented with item 1b provides an example of a user profile, to ensure that the participants understand the requirement and question correctly. A shared Netflix account, the most popular VOD platform, is displayed. A marked red box, accompanied by an explanatory text, indicates the intention of item 1b. 

      18.5 3.5 Reliability and validity
	While constructing the research design of this study, the reliability is preserved by adapting existing scales with proven reliability. The reliability of the modified serendipity scale and the users' need for uniqueness scale are accepted and, therefore, improves the generalizability of the sample in the survey (Appendix A). The reliability of the survey is limited for the knowledgeable consumer scale (table 4), as the Cronbach's alpha is established at α = .58. An in-depth elaboration of the reliability on each scale is found in §3.4. 
	The construct validity of the survey, which regulates the data set up, collection, and interaction, was ensured beforehand by conducting a pre-test with several participants with different backgrounds (Golafshani, 2003; Matthews & Ross, 2010). The content validity of the research design, measuring the representation of all factors in a variable (Cohen et al., 2018), is tested and ensured through factor analysis on all relevant scales. Moreover, adapting existing scales of Kotkov et al. (2018a) and Ruvio et al. (2008), and creating scales based on the presented criteria in previous academic literature, ensures the criterion validity. The three types of validity measurement improve the generalizability of the sample (Matthews & Ross, 2010).
	The internal and external validity of the presented research is investigated, as a quasi-experiment is included in the survey. One the one hand, internal validity of the stimulus (figure 2) refers to the control and reflection of the reality of the quasi-experiment (Winter, 2000) and is sought by recreating the layout of the most popular VOD interface, namely Netflix. Also, to ensure the presentation of non-popular and new items, the recommendations in the stimulus are self-created. Self-creating recommendations could lead to a potential threat of the internal validity, as participants may search online for the recommended items in the stimulus and notice the non-existence of each item.
	External validity, on the other hand, refers to the generalizability of the results of the quasi-experiment (Winter, 2000) and is enforced by online distributing the survey on international platforms that include diverse potential participants. However, a threat to external validity is the skewed representation of nationalities. As presented in Appendix C (table 2), 66.6% of all participants have Dutch nationality.



Figure 3. The image presented with item 1b.


19 4. RESULTS
      
      The following chapter describes the results of this study. Firstly, an assumption check provides approval to continue with the mediation regression. Second, the first mediation model is presented, which depicts the indirect and direct effect of consumer characteristics on user satisfaction with the interference of serendipity. The direct effect of each consumer characteristic predictor is measured according to a multiple linear regression. The indirect effects are measured with PROCESS model 4 by Hayes (2017). After outlining the results of the first mediation model, the second mediation model is presented. The second mediation model records the direct and indirect effects of consumer characteristics on user satisfaction after the perception of 100% serendipity. Similar tests for the second mediation model are conducted, in comparison to the first mediation model, to establish the direct and indirect effects. Lastly, hypothesis testing is presented.


      19.1 4.1 Assumption check
	Before testing the mediated effect of serendipity before and after the stimulus, the descriptives of the mediation variables novelty/unexpectedness and relevance, and the outcome variable user satisfaction are presented to test if these variables are acceptable for the mediation model. As described in §3.4, new variables that calculate the mean of each participant are created to transform the ordinal character of the variables to a continuous scale. 
	Table 7 presents an overview of the mean and standard deviation of the mediating and outcome variables before and after the appearance of the stimulus. Before the stimulus, outcome variable user satisfaction records a M = 3.62, SD = .88. After the introduction of the stimulus, the level of user satisfaction decreases to an average of M = 2.93, SD = 1.03. 
	Moreover, the perception of serendipity changes. The perception of the serendipity component novelty/unexpectedness increases from a M = 2.95, SD = .75 before the stimulus to an average of M = 3.75, SD = .64 after the stimulus. Relevance, the second component of serendipity, presents an average of M = 3.75, SD = .68 before the appearance of the stimulus and decreases to M = 3.09, SD = 82 after the stimulus. Comparing the mean of both serendipity components before and after the stimulus, indicate that a higher level of serendipity is represented in the stimulus than the personalized VOD layout of the participant. The mean of the serendipity component novelty/unexpectedness increased from M = 2.95 (before the stimulus) to M = 3.75 (after the stimulus), indicating that participants perceived a higher level of novel and unexpected recommended items in the stimulus. The mean of relevance increased from M = 3.75 (before the stimulus) to M = 3.09 (after the stimulus), suggesting that less relevant items are presented in the stimulus to the participants due to the absence of a personalized VOD interface.

Table 7. Descriptives before and after stimulus with N = 290.
VariableBefore stimulusAfter stimulusMeanStd. DeviationMeanStd. DeviationUser satisfaction (Y)3.62.882.931.03Novelty/Unexpectedness (M1)2.95.753.75.64Relevance (M2)3.75.683.09.82
	Before continuing to the meditation model, the Skewness value and Kurtosis are checked. Skewness measures the asymmetry of the distribution, while Kurtosis measures the 'peakedness' of the distribution (Pallant, 2016). The before and after stimulus results of the Skewness and Kurtosis test concerning the outcome and mediation variables are displayed in table 8. All, but one, variables record a Skewness and Kurtosis values between -1 and 1, meaning that these variables are normally distributed. One variable, relevance before the stimulus, reports a Skewness value of -1.16 and a Kurtosis of 1.68. Although these values are still acceptable according to George and Mallery (2016), a higher level of skewness could indicate a negative high skewed distribution with a high positive 'peakedness' level. 

Table 8. Assumption check Kurtosis and Skewness before and after stimulus with N = 290. 
VariableBefore stimulusAfter stimulusSkewnessKurtosisSkewnessKurtosisUser satisfaction (Y)-.75.38-.16-.95Novelty/Unexpectedness (M1).02-.13-.26-.09Relevance (M2)-1.161.68-.48-.48

      19.2 4.2 Mediation model of the serendipity scale before the stimulus
	To measure the indirect and direct effect of consumer characteristics on user satisfaction through serendipity as a mediating variable, the steps provided by Hayes (2017) are followed. At first, the mediation model is created (figure 4) that acts in accordance with model 4 by Hayes (2017, p. 585). All predictors are presented independent from each other and formulate indirect effect paths towards both mediators (a) and direct effect path towards the outcome (c'). The mediated paths (b) record the indirect effect of serendipity on user satisfaction. Moreover, all variables are transformed into mean-centered variables, as discussed in section §3.4 and advised by Hayes (2017). However, the limitation of mean-centered variables is reduced collinearity. Multicollinearity in the mean-centered predicting variables is carefully tested in a multiple linear regression. 
	According to Hayes (2017), the following step is measuring the causal effect of consumer characteristics and user satisfaction by conducting a linear regression. In this case, a multiple linear regression is administered, as multiple predictors are presented. The results are presented in §4.2.1. The next step (§4.2.2) is determining the direct and indirect effect of serendipity between consumer characteristics and user satisfaction using PROCESS model 4. PROCESS model 4 by Hayes (2017) depicts a simple mediation model. The model by Hayes (2017) is adapted for this study, namely examining multiple predictors with two mediators and one outcome. Last, the conditional effects of the mediation model before the perception of the stimulus are reported (§4.2.3).



Figure 4. mediation model before the introduction of the stimulus
      19.2.1 4.2.1 Direct effect of consumer characteristics and user satisfaction
	The direct effect of four independent consumer characteristics on user satisfaction is predicted according to a multiple linear regression. Prior to the regression, the following equation is formed:
Ybefore = iy + c1Xhours + c2Xknowledge + c3Xgenre + c4Xunique + ey
      The Casewise Diagnostics detected one outlier while conducting the multiple linear regression, therefore case number 255 is deleted from the data. Moreover, after checking studentized deleted residuals, two outliers below -3 are detected and excluded from the data. This means that a sample of N = 287 is represented in the multiple regression. A new regression is run. 
      Linearity is visible in the second multiple linear regression, as concluded by partial regression plots of studentized residuals against the predicted values. Independence of residuals is indicated, as the Durbin-Watson statistic is .002. Visual inspection of a plot of studentized residuals versus unstandardized predicted values confirmed homoscedasticity. Moreover, no evidence of multicollinearity is found, as the tolerance varies between .92 and .98 and the VIF value varies between 1.02 and 1.08. The multiple linear regression model statistically significantly predicted User satisfaction (before), F(4, 282) = 8.899, p < .001. The R2 for the overall model is 11.2%. According to Cohen et al. (2018), a causal effect size of 11.2%, which predicts change in the dependent variable, is small. The small direct effect size indicates the importance of serendipity as a mediator. The predicting variables hours (B = 0.2, p < .05) and knowledge (B = -.30, p < .001) are statistically significant.  The other two predicting variables genre and uniqueness are not significant predictors. An overview of the multiple linear regression is presented in table 9.

Table 9. Multiple regression results for user satisfaction before stimulus with N = 287
User satisfaction95% Confidence Interval for BBLower BoundUpper BoundStd. Error BβR2Model.112Constant4.21***3.754.67.23Hours.02**.01.03.01.15Knowledge-.30***-.42-.19.06-.30Genre-.02-.06.02.02-.05Uniqueness.10-.02.23.06.10Notes: 
* B = unstandardized beta; Std. Error B = standard error for the unstandardized beta; β = standardized beta
* *p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001


      19.2.2 4.2.2 Mediation effect before the stimulus
	To estimate the mediation effect of novelty/unexpectedness and relevance before the perception of the stimulus, two equations, based on the mediation model presented in figure 4, are formed:

Model MBNovUnex = iM + a1Xhours + a2Xknowledge + a3Xgenre + a4Xunique + eMBNovUnexp 
Model MBRel = iM + a5Xhours + a6Xknowledge + a7Xgenre + a8Xunique + eMBRel 

	Predicting the outcome, user satisfaction before the stimulus, in the mediation model (figure 4) using PROCESS model 4, the following equation is tested: 

Model Ybefore = iY + c'1Xhours + c'2Xknowledge + c'3Xgenre + c'4Xunique + b1MBNovUnex + b2MBRel + eYbefore

	Table 10 present an overview of the mediation model using PROCESS model 4 by Hayes (2017). The results of this model are used to test hypotheses H1 through H6c. The demographic variables age, gender (binary dummy variable), and nationality (binary dummy variable) are included in the mediation model as covariates or control variables. The model summary of the mediation effect before the stimulus is displayed in table 11. Conducting PROCESS model 4 (table 10) resulted in the following equations: 

Model MBNovUnex = 2.90 - 0.00Xhours + 0.00Xknowledge - 0.02Xgenre + 0.10Xunique + eMBNovUnexp
Model MBRel = 4.58 + 0.02Xhours - 0.22Xknowledge - 0.01Xgenre - 0.01Xunique + eMBRel

Model Ybefore = 0.89 + 0.01Xhours - 0.11Xknowledge - 0.00Xgenre + 0.14Xunique - 0.12MBNovUnex + 0.77MBRel + eYbefore

	Derived from the model summary (table 11), the regression model of the mediator novelty/unexpectedness is statistically significant F(7,279) = 3.09, p = .004. Moreover, the model records a R2 = .072, meaning that mediator novelty/unexpectedness predicts 7.2%. However, no statistically significant paths between the four consumer characteristics and novelty/unexpectedness are found. The absence of statistical significance indicates that the predictors hours (a1 = -.00, p = .619), knowledge (a2 = .00, p = .939), genre (a4 = -.02, p = .332) and users' need for uniqueness (a4 = .10, p = .082) did not significantly predict the mediation variable of novelty/unexpectedness. Therefore, H1, H2, H3 and H4 are partially rejected. 
	The regression model for the second mediator relevance is statistically significant F(7,279) = 8.54, p < .001. The R2 = .177, implicating that 17.7% of the variance in the serendipity component relevancy, is explained. Two predictors are presented with statistical significance, namely hours (a5 = .02, p = .006) and knowledge (a6 = -.22, p < .001). The statistical significance of both predictors means that H1 (hours) and H2 (knowledge) are partially accepted for the mediation variable relevance. However, based on previous academic literature presented in section §2.3.1, the indirect relation between the predictor hours and user satisfaction with serendipity as an interfered element was expected to have a negative effect. Hence, H1 (hours) is rejected for mediator relevance. The other predicting paths of genre (a7 = -.01, p = .400) and users' need for uniqueness (a8 = -.01, p = .871) are not statistically significant, meaning that H3 (genre) and H4 (unique) are rejected for mediator relevance. 
	Next, the mediation effect of novelty/unexpectedness and relevance on user satisfaction is analyzed. The regression model regarding user satisfaction is statistically significant F(9,277) = 24.75, p < .001 and explains 44.6% of the variance (R2 = .446) in user satisfaction. The predictors knowledge (c'2 = -.11, p = .024) and users' need for uniqueness (c'4 = .14, p > .001)  are statistically significant, in addition to the statistically significant mediators novelty/unexpectedness (b1 = -.12, p = .023) and relevance (b2 = .77, p < .001). The statistical significance of the mediated variables suggests a mediated effect between consumer characteristics and user satisfaction. Moreover, due to the statistical significance of paths b1 and b2, H6ab, combining serendipity components novelty (H6a) and unexpectedness (H6b), and H6c are accepted. However, H6ab presents a negative relationship with users' perception of VOD layouts instead of a positive relation as indicated prior to the statistical tests, and therefore, H6ab is rejected. No significant direct effect on user satisfaction is found for the predictors hours (c'1 = .01, p = .374) and genre (c'2 = -.00, p = .937). 
	 Additionally, the demographic variables age, gender (binary dummy variable), and nationality (binary dummy variable) are included in the model and act as control variables. Table 10 shows that gender (B = -.25, p = .015) is the only statistically significant variable in the model for the first mediator novelty/unexpectedness. Moreover, age (B = -.01, p = .001) is the only statistically significant demographic variable in the model regarding the mediation variable relevance and no significant control variables are found in the regression model for user satisfaction. 

Table 10. Mediation model before stimulus with N = 287
MBNovUnexMBRelYbeforeVariablepathBs.e. BppathBs.e. B p pathBs.e. B p Constant(i1)2.90.30.000(i2)4.58.25.000(i3).89.42.036Xhoursa1 -.00.01.619a5.02.01.006c'1.01.01.374Xknowledgea2.00.06.939a6-.22.05.000c'2-.11.05.024Xgenrea3 -.02.02.332a7-.01.02.400c'3-.00.02.937Xuniquea4 .10.06.082a8-.01.05.871c'4.14.05.000MBNovUnexb1-.12.05.023MBRelb2.77.06.000Age.01.00.153-.01.00.001.01.00.086Gender-.25.10.015.10.08.221.10.09.278Nationality-.10.10.337.01.09.920-.08.09.403Notes: 
* B = unstandardized regression coefficient; s.e. B = standard error of the coefficient; p = statistical significance

Table 11. Model summary with N = 287
Mi Novelty/Unexpectedness (before)M2 Relevance (before)Y User satisfaction (before)R2.072.177.446FF(7,279) = 3.09, p = .004F(7,279) = 8.54, p < .001F(9,277) = 24.75, p < .001


      19.2.3 4.2.3 Conditional effects
      Additionally, the PROCESS model 4 showed two indirect effects and one direct effect for each predicting variable. The first indirect effect follows the path from the predicting variable through the first mediating variable novelty/unexpectedness, resulting in user satisfaction. The path from the predicting variable to user satisfaction, with the second mediation variable relevance, forms the second indirect effect. The conditional indirect effects of each predictor are presented in table 12. 
      The statistical relation of the indirect effect is tested with 95% bootstrap confidence interval with the criteria of differentiating from zero (Hayes, 2017). The results are presented in table 12. The bootstrap sample of 5000 is constructed the distribution of the data (95% CI). The criteria of .05 bootstrap CI level is used to reject or accept the indirect effects of the predictors. All indirect effects record small effect sizes. The most substantial indirect effect is the path from predicting variable knowledge to user satisfaction with the mediation variable relevance (a6 + b2 = -.17). To illustrate, this indirect effect size means that a decrease in established preference (knowledge) leads to a higher user satisfaction through the serendipity component relevance. However, the illustrated path (a6 + b2) is presented with statistical insignificance, as the confidence interval overlaps with 0 and, therefore, is rejected as supported indirect effect. One indirect path is accepted according to the bootstrap confidence interval: a8 + b2. This indicates that there is a negative indirect effect of the users' need for uniqueness on user satisfaction mediated through relevant serendipitous items. 
      
Table 12. Indirect effect of predictors; before the stimulus with N = 287
95% Bootstrap CIVariablespathIndirect effectsLLULXhoursa1 + b1.0004-.00.00a5 + b2.0124.00.02Xknowledgea2 + b1-.0005-.02.01a6 + b2-.1656-.27-.08Xgenrea3 + b1.0022-.00.01a7 + b2-.0102-.04.02Xuniquea4 + b1-.0123-.04.00a8 + b2-.0061-.08.08

	The direct effects of the predictors on user satisfaction are presented in table 10 and table 13. Evidence of a direct effect on user satisfaction is found in the predictors knowledge (c'2 = -.11, p = .024) and users' need for uniqueness (c'4 = .14, p < .001). No evidence of a direct effect on user satisfaction is found for the predictors hours (c'1 = .01, p = .374) and genre (c'3 = -.00, p = .937).
	The direct effect sizes reported in the multiple regression in section §4.2.1 overlap with the statistical significance of predictor knowledge. The results of the mediation model and the results of the multiple linear regression are compared to uncover whether the predictors present statistical significance for both tests. A direct effect is found in the consumer characteristic knowledge on user satisfaction. Hence, H5 is solely accepted for the consumer characteristic of knowledge (H5b). Other consumer characteristics are statistically insignificant and therefore rejected. 
	The fact that the statistical significance and the direct effect sizes of the multiple linear regression (table 9) and the mediation regression (table 13) differentiate is associated with the inclusion of the demographic variables as covariates in the mediation regression (table 13). The direct effects displayed in table 13 are adjusted for the control variables age, gender (binary dummy variable), and nationality (binary dummy variable). In contrast to table 9, the predictor hours is statistically insignificant in table 13, indicating that one of the demographic variables acts as confounding factor for hours. The statistical significance of predictor users' need for uniqueness is just above the acceptable p-value (p = .097) in table 9. Due to the interference of demographic variables, the predictor records statistical significance (p = .006) in table 13. Knowledge is statistically significant in both tables, and therefore, no confounding factors are associated with this predictor. 

Table 13. Direct effect of predictors; before the stimulus with N = 287
VariablepathDirect effectS.E.pXhoursc'1.0055.01.374Xknowledgec'2-.1147.05.024Xgenrec'3-.0013.02.937Xuniquec'4.1420.05.006

      19.3 4.3 Mediation model of the serendipity scale after the stimulus
	An addition to this study is a quasi-experiment that measures user satisfaction after the perception of 100% serendipity based on the four, previously presented, consumer characteristics. The same steps, as shown in the previous section (§4.2), by Hayes (2017) are followed to uncover the indirect and direct effect of consumer characteristics on user satisfaction, with serendipity as a mediated component, after the perception of a 100% serendipity stimulus. The mediation model is presented in figure 5. 



Figure 5. Mediation model after the introduction of the stimulus      
      19.3.1 4.3.1 Direct effect of consumer characteristics and user satisfaction
	The direct effect of the four predictors, hours, knowledge, genre, and unique, on user satisfaction after the perception of the stimulus is measured according to a multiple linear regression based on the following equation: 
Yafter = iy + c1Xhours + c2Xknowledge + c3Xgenre + c4Xhours + ey
	While conducting the multiple linear regression, no outliers are detected by The Casewise Diagnostics. Other assumptions of the multiple regression, linearity and homoscedasticity, are assessed and accepted. Moreover, the Durbin-Watson statistic, tolerance value, and VIF value present acceptable scores and are, therefore, accepted. The overall multiple linear regression is not statistically significantly predicting user satisfaction after the perception of the stimulus, F(4, 282) = .356, p = .840. Moreover, all four variables are statistically insignificant. The R2 is established at 0.5%, meaning that a very small percentage predicts the change in the dependent variable. The minimal direct effect size indicates the importance of serendipity as a mediator. The results of the multiple regression regarding the user satisfaction after the perception of the stimulus, are presented in table 14. 

Table 14. Multiple regression results for user satisfaction after stimulus with N = 287
User satisfaction95,0% Confidence Interval for BBLower BoundUpper BoundStd. Error BβR2Model.005Constant2.73***2.143.32.30Hours-.00-.02.01.01-.03Knowledge-.01-.16.14.07-.01Genre.02-.03.07.03.04Uniqueness.08-.08.24.08.06Notes: 
* B = unstandardized beta; Std. Error B = standard error for the unstandardized beta; β = standardized beta
* *p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001

      19.3.2 4.3.2 Mediation effect
	Two equations are formed, based on the mediation model (figure), that measures the mediation effect of novelty/unexpectedness and relevance after the perception of 100% serendipity: 

Model MANovUnex = iM + a1Xhours + a2Xknowledge + a3Xgenre + a4Xunique + eMANovUnexp 
Model MARel = iM + a1Xhours + a2Xknowledge + a3Xgenre + a4Xunique  + eMARel 

	The following equation is constructed to predict the outcome of user satisfaction after the stimulus:

Model Yafter = iY + c'1Xhours + c'2Xknowledge + c'3Xgenre + c'4Xunique + b1MANovUnex + b2MARel + eYAfter
	
      The mediation model is conducted using PROCESS model 4. The results of the model are presented in table 15. The demographic variables age, gender (binary dummy variable), and nationality (binary dummy variable) act as control variables. The following equations resulted from the mediation model: 

Model MANovUnex = 4.33 + 0.00Xhours - 0.02Xknowledge - 0.01Xgenre - 0.08Xunique + eMANovUnexp 
Model MARel = 2.66 - 0.00Xhours + 0.04Xknowledge + 0.01Xgenre + 0.10Xunique + eMARel 

Model Yafter = 1.67 + 0.00Xhours - 0.03Xknowledge + 0.01Xgenre - 0.00Xunique - 0.33MANovUnex + 0.83MARel + eYAfter

	The model summary (table 16), reports a statistical significant regression model for the mediator novelty/unexpectedness F(7,279) = 2.32, p = .026. The mediator novelty/unexpectedness explains 5.5% of the variance of the outcome in the model. However, all paths to novelty/unexpectedness are presented with statistical insignificance. 
	The next regression model regarding the mediator relevance is statistically insignificant F(7,279) = 1.39, p = .339 with R2 = .029. Additionally, no predictors are found statistically significant.
	The regression model on user satisfaction considering mediators novelty/unexpectedness and relevance is statistically significant F(9,277) = 39.66, p < .001 and explains 56.3% of the variance (R2 = .563) in user satisfaction. The high percentage of the explained variance indicates the strong mediated effect of serendipity between the consumer characteristics and user satisfaction. Moreover, all user characteristics are presented with statistical insignificance. Nonetheless, both mediating variables novelty/unexpectedness (b2 = -.33, p < .001) and relevance (b3 = .83, p < .001) present statistical significance. 
	The control variables, or the demographic variables age, gender (binary dummy variable), and nationality (binary dummy variable), are included in the model. For model MANovUnex and MARel, statistical significance is found in the control variable age. The other demographic variables for both mediating models are statistically insignificant. For the mediation model with user satisfaction after the stimulus as outcome, no control variables are found that presented statistical significance. 

Table 15. Mediation model after stimulus with N = 287
MANovUnexMARelYafterVariablepathBs.e. BppathBs.e. B p pathBs.e. B p Constant(i1)4.33.26.000(i2)2.66.33.000(i3)1.67.47.000Xhoursa1 .00.01.966a5-.00.01.579c'1.00.01.791Xknowledgea2-.02.05.687a6.04.06.477c'2-.03.05.577Xgenrea3 -.01.02.665a7.01.02.487c'3.01.02.590Xuniquea4 -.08.05.126a8.10.07.129c'4-.00.06.938MANovUnexb1-.33.07.000MARelb2.83.05.000Age-.01.00.001-.00.00.277-.00.00.762Gender.01.09.870.13.11.255.04.09.701Nationality-.01.09.949.14.12.217-.02.10.850Notes: 
* B = unstandardized regression coefficient; s.e. B = standard error of the coefficient; p = statistical significance


Table 16. Model summary with N = 287
Mi Novelty/Unexpectedness (after)M2 Relevance (after)Y User satisfaction (after)R2.055.029.563FF(7,279) = 2.32, p = .026F(7,279) = 1.39, p = .339F(9,277) = 39.66, p < .001

      19.3.3 4.3.3 Conditional effects
	Similar to the previous indirect effects before the perception of the stimulus (table 12), PROCESS model 4 presents two small indirect effects sizes for each individual predictor. The paths of the indirect effects for each predictor after the perception of 100% serendipity are displayed in table 17.  
	A bootstrap sample of 5000, with .05 as acceptance/rejection level, is used to measure the statistical relation of the indirect effects. Comparing the indirect effect results of table 12 to table 17, similar paths presents statistical relations of the indirect effect. The path from predictor knowledge to relevance to user satisfaction (a6 + b3) suggests a small positive indirect effect. Moreover, a small positive indirect effect is found in the path from predictor users' need for uniqueness to relevance to user satisfaction (a8 + b3).  However, the confidence intervals for these effects overlap 0, and therefore, no conclusions regarding the indirect effects between consumer characteristics and user satisfaction after the perception of the stimulus are drawn. 

Table 17. Indirect effect of predictors; after stimulus with N = 287
95% Bootstrap CIVariablespathIndirect effectsLLULXhoursa1 + b1-.0001-.00.00a5 + b2-.0036-.02.01Xknowledgea2 + b1.0064-.03.04a6 + b2.0367-.07.15Xgenrea3 + b1.0023-.01.01a7 + b2.0122-.02.05Xuniquea4 + b1.0257-.01.07a8 + b2.0824-.03.19
	The direct effects of each predictor on user satisfaction are displayed in table 18. No evidence is found of a direct effect, as all effects present a significance level of p > .05. After analyzing the statistical insignificance of the direct effects on user satisfaction, it is concluded that no direct effect is found between consumer characteristics and user satisfaction after the perception of 100% serendipity. 

Table 18. Direct effect of predictors; after stimulus with N = 287
VariablepathDirect effectS.E.pXhoursc'1.0018.01.791Xknowledgec'2-.0295.05.577Xgenrec'3.0096.02.590Xuniquec'4-.0043.06.938

		



      19.4 4.4 Hypothesis testing
	Table 19 presents an overview of all accepted and rejected hypotheses. The results of the hypotheses reflect on serendipity in a personalized VOD environment. The acceptable effect sizes of the mediation model before the stimulus are displayed in figure 6. As no acceptable indirect or direct effect sizes are found in the mediation model after the perception of 100% serendipity, no additional visualizing figure is created.

Table 19. Accepted and rejected hypotheses
HypothesisMediator Nov/UnexpMediator Relevance OutcomeH1: The number of hours spent on VOD platforms is negatively associated with perceiving serendipityRejectedRejectedRejectedH2: Knowledge of content by users of VOD platforms is negatively associated with perceiving serendipityRejectedAcceptedPartially acceptedH3: Genre diversity is positively associated with perceiving serendipityRejectedRejectedRejectedH4: Users' need for uniqueness is positively associated with perceiving serendipityRejectedRejectedRejectedH5a: The number of hours spent on VOD platforms relates negatively to users' perceptions of VOD layoutsRejectedH5b: Knowledge of content by users of VOD platforms relates negatively to users' perceptions of VOD layoutsAcceptedH5c: Broad interest in genre relates positively to users' perceptions of VOD layoutsRejectedH5d: Users' need for uniqueness relates positively to users' perceptions of VOD layoutsRejectedH6ab: Novelty/Unexpectedness in the context of serendipity relates positively to users' perceptions of VOD layoutsRejectedH6c: Relevance in the context of serendipity relates positively to users' perceptions of VOD layoutsAccepted


Figure 6. Mediation model before the stimulus with accepted hypotheses (N = 287)


20 5. DISCUSSION

	The following chapter presents the most important findings of this study. Firstly, the literature implications will be discussed in three parts: (1) the perception of serendipity by consumers, (2) the mediating role of serendipity, and (3) the evaluation of recommendation systems through an assessment of user satisfaction. Secondly, suggestions for VOD environments are provided so as to improve their recommendation system. The last part of the discussion outlines the limitations of the study and presents suggestions for future research regarding the implementation of serendipity in VOD recommendation systems based on consumer characteristics.
	
      20.1 5.1 Literature implications
	The objective of this thesis is to establish the role and level of serendipity in VOD environments for consumers that present particular characteristics by following the research question: To what extent do users perceive and are affected by serendipity in VOD layouts?. To realize the main objective of this study, a closer look had to be taken at the scale of the four presented consumer characteristics, the level of perceived serendipity, and the user satisfaction of VOD layouts.
      Accordingly, this study is structured in three parts, as is reflected in section §5.1. The perception of serendipity by VOD consumers based on their characteristics is outlined and studied in the first part of this thesis. The perception is constructed of two parts; identifying (1) novel/unexpected items and (2) relevant items. The second part of this section discusses the mediating role of serendipity elements between consumer characteristics and user satisfaction of VOD interfaces. Again, the mediating aspect of both serendipity elements is discussed separately and collectively. Lastly, an evaluation of a personalized VOD environment and implementation of 100% serendipity stimulus is presented by assessing the level of user satisfaction.

20.1.1 	5.1.1 The perception of serendipity
      This study follows the serendipity measurement according to Kotkov et al. (2018a). In Kotkov's study (2018a), three elements of serendipity are differentiated. Namely, novelty, unexpectedness, and relevance. This thesis solely found two elements of perceived serendipity. The first serendipity element in this study combines novelty and unexpectedness in one element. Relevance is the second serendipity element used in this study. The perception of both serendipity elements in personalized VOD environments are studied based on the four presented consumer characteristics: (1) hours spent on VOD platforms, (2) the level of knowledge the consumer encompasses before the visitation of VOD environments, (3) the number of interested genres and (4) the users' need for uniqueness.
      For the perception of the mediator novelty/unexpectedness in relation to the presented consumer characteristics, no significant relations are found. In other words, consumers were unable to perceive the combining serendipity element of novelty and unexpectedness. A possible explanation for the insignificance of all paths between consumer characteristics and novelty/unexpectedness is the inability of the consumer to perceive the combination of the elements. Novel items are not necessarily unexpected, and unexpected items are not necessarily novel. The absence of statistical significance highlights the importance of separating each serendipity element.
      On the other hand, the consumer characteristics of hours and knowledge do present statistical significance for the perception of serendipity element relevance. Firstly, the relation between the hours spent on a VOD platform and perceiving relevant serendipitous items is statistically significant. However, contrary to Nguyen et al. (2014), it records a positive effect rather than a negative one. The positive relation could indicate two possible scenarios. The first possible scenario, as discussed by Berry et al. (2011), is that power-users of VOD content increasingly ignore provided recommendations. This can be, for example, because, power-users watch pre-selected TV shows in one genre category. By ignoring recommendations and constantly consuming similar content, the data collection and preference development for consumer profiles are reduced. As a result, the consumer perceives a higher level of serendipity in the provided recommendation. An alternative explanation for the positive relation between the predictor hours and serendipity component relevance is the perception of solely relevant recommendations without the perception of the other serendipity components of novelty and unexpectedness. This is highly feasible, as the relation between the predictor hours and mediator novelty/unexpectedness is insignificant. The fact that a high level of relevant recommendations is perceived by power-users, outside the context of serendipity, could indicate that the preferences of these consumers are reflected in the provided recommendations.
      The second statistically significant relation is found between the predictor knowledge and serendipity element relevance. The significance of this relation affirms the results of Xiao and Benbasat (2007) and Goodman et al. (2013) concluding that consumers with highly developed preferences and product expertise are less likely to be pleased with the provided recommendations. The findings of this thesis demonstrate that consumers with highly developed preferences, and therefore an established user profile, perceive a high level of relevant recommendations. However, similar to the previously discussed relation regarding hours and relevance, the relation between predictor knowledge and mediator novelty/unexpectedness is insignificant. Hence, no conclusion can be drawn regarding the perception of relevant recommendations in the context of serendipity by knowledgeable consumers, as it is likely that serendipity components novelty and unexpectedness are not considered.
      Again, an item is serendipitous if the item is novel, unexpected, and relevant (Kotkov et al., 2018b). The fact that not one consumer characteristic presents statistical significance for both mediators implies that no evidence is found that consumers perceive serendipity in their personalized VOD environment. The absence of perceiving serendipity could indicate two scenarios. First, the consumer might not be aware that they perceive serendipity. Novel and unexpected items are repeatedly recommended to the consumers without and therefore recognized as familiar and expected items (Silveira et al., 2019). A second, and possibly dangerous scenario, is that no serendipity or a very low percentage of serendipity is presented to the consumers. Serendipity is the solution to prevent the filter bubble (Maccatrozzo, 2012; Ricci et al., 2012; Nguyen et al., 2014; Saat et al., 2018; Kotkov et al., 2018a, 2018b; Silveira et al., 2019). Without serendipity in recommendation systems, consumers are constantly exposed to the feedback loop that reaffirms existing perspectives and limits the exposure of other perspectives (Chaney et al., 2018). Especially since consumers are becoming more dependent on recommendation systems (Banker & Khetani, 2019), the implementation of serendipity to prevent the filter bubble is becoming more important.
      
      20.1.2 5.1.2 The mediating role of serendipity 
      In line with previous academic literature by Maccatrozzo et al. (2017b) and Silveira et al. (2019), evidence is found that serendipity acts as a mediating variable between consumer characteristics and user satisfaction. Therefore, this thesis contributes to the theory by Kotkov et al. (2018b) which explains that the implementation of serendipity in algorithmic design influences the level of user satisfaction in VOD environments. Evidence of the mediating role of serendipity is explained by means of (1) the absent direct effect, (2) the change in explained variance in the multiple linear regression and mediation regression and (3) the difference in variable mean after the stimulus compared to the mean before the stimulus. 
      First, to follow the mediation model steps by Hayes (2017), a multiple linear regression was run to uncover the direct effects between consumer characteristics and user satisfaction without the interference of serendipity. A minimal effect or no direct effect is expected as consumers are immediately exposed to serendipity when visiting VOD platforms, as serendipity is incorporated in the recommendations that form the interface (Ricci et al., 2012). The multiple linear regression model (table 9) records two significant and small direct effect sizes between consumer characteristics hours and knowledge and the outcome user satisfaction. Even though the other two direct effects between the predictors genre and uniqueness and outcome user satisfaction present statistically insignificance, the paths indicate a small direct effect size. As no direct effect between all consumer characteristics and user satisfaction was expected, no academic literature is searched to underpin these hypotheses. However, because the relation between knowledge and user satisfaction presents the most substantial direct effect of -.30, an explanation is sought. As discussed by Xiao and Benbasat (2007) and Knijnenburg et al. (2012), knowledgeable consumers purposefully search for content as they have knowledge of content beforehand. As a result, the importance of the mediating role of serendipity reduces. If consumers have developed preferences and want to watch a specific TV show, they could be disappointed if the preferred TV show is not included in the VOD catalog. Hence, user satisfaction decreases. Additionally, the overall explained variance of the causal direct effect resulted from the multiple linear regression model is 11.2% and, therefore, described as being small by Cohen et al. (2018). To summarize the above, the small direct effect sizes between each consumer characteristic and user satisfaction and the low explained variance of the multiple linear regression model demonstrates the mediating role of serendipity. 
      Second, the high percentage of total explained variance in user satisfaction before the stimulus (44.6%) suggests the mediated relation of serendipity. Without the interference of serendipity, as recorded in the multiple linear regression (table 9), the explained variance is low (11.2%). However, the explained variance of the mediation model (table 13) increases extensively due to the implementation of serendipity.
      Third, evidence is found regarding the mediating role of serendipity in comparing the mediation model of the serendipity scale for personalized VOD environments and the mediation model after the perception of the stimulus. Presenting the same serendipity scales before and after the perception of 100% serendipity records a difference in mean of mediators' novelty/unexpectedness and relevance and outcome user satisfaction (table 7). The difference in variable mean after a change in the level of implemented serendipity emphasizes the mediating role of serendipity. Explanations for a decrease in the mean of novelty/unexpectedness and increase in the mean of relevance are to be found in §5.1.1 and the change in the mean of the outcome user satisfaction is explained in §5.1.3.
      
      20.1.3 5.1.3 User satisfaction in VOD environments
	The third part of this thesis is to uncover the user satisfaction of serendipity in a personalized VOD environment and a stimulus with 100% serendipity based on the four presented consumer characteristics. 
      First, user satisfaction in a personalized VOD environment is explored in the first mediating regression model (figure 4). As hypothesized, the serendipity element of relevance records a positive relation towards user satisfaction (path b1). In line with Silveira et al. (2019), the personalized recommendations for VOD consumers represent relevant content that is related to their preferences. The large effect size between relevance and user satisfaction suggests the importance of the serendipity component relevance. However, contrary to Matt et al. (2014), Kotkov et al. (2018b), and Silveira et al. (2017), the serendipity component novelty/unexpectedness reports a negative path (b2) towards user satisfaction. The negative effect, although small, indicates an off-balance of novelty or unexpectedness in provided recommendations (Matt et al., 2014). Maccatrozzo et al. (2017b) describe another possible explanation for the negative relation by questioning the coping ability of consumers to perceive novel recommendations. Moreover, observing unexpected items could be a positive or negative surprise. The small negative effect between novelty/unexpectedness and user satisfaction suggests that a small percentage of the personalized recommendations are perceived as a negative surprise. 
      The fact that consumers are not able to cope with novelty is presented in the results of the second mediation model (figure 5), as the statistically significant path (b1) between novelty/unexpectedness and user satisfaction reports an increased negative effect. After the perception of all unfamiliar and novel items, the negative effect size towards user satisfaction increases. The importance of receiving relevant recommendations in a 100% serendipitous environment increases as well. Therefore, the stimulus contributes to the theory by Silveira et al. (2019) that relevance is the most essential serendipity component. 
      However, as serendipity elements of novelty and unexpectedness record a negative relation and do not act in coherence with the other serendipity element of relevance, consumers were unable to perceive serendipity in both mediation models. Moreover, the insignificance of all other paths in the second mediation model (figure 5) suggests that consumers are unable to cope with 100% serendipity if it is presented out of the blue. As expected, a personalized recommendation environment increases the level of user satisfaction (Silveira et al., 2019). The results of the serendipity scale after the perception of the stimulus indicates that the implementation of serendipity needs to happen slowly and stretched over a more extended period.  

      20.2 5.2 Institutional implication
      This thesis supports the assumption of the mediating role of serendipity in recommendation environments between consumer characteristics and user satisfaction. Therefore, VOD companies should be aware of implementing the right amount of serendipity in their provided recommendations. The findings of this thesis report the serendipity element of relevance as the most important component in serendipity. A high level of relevance should, therefore, be presented in serendipitous items, when balancing with novelty and unexpectedness. The negative result of novelty/unexpectedness indicates that VOD consumers should be careful with the high-level representation of the combining serendipity factor. Thus, implementing novel and unexpected items should be established in combination with a high level of relevance. 
      Due to the statistical insignificance of the relation between almost all consumer characteristics and user satisfaction, it is concluded that consumers were unable to identify serendipitous items. No consumer characteristic significantly perceived all elements of serendipity. In order to increase the perception of serendipity, and therefore the user satisfaction, a higher level of serendipitous items needs to be considered. With the implementation of serendipitous items, the coping level of each consumer should be investigated and included in user profiles. Also, the coping level could be based on the demonstrated consumer characteristics in this thesis. Assessing the level of each consumer characteristic advises VOD companies whether the consumer is able to deal with serendipity and if a high level of serendipity is preferred. Due to the results of the stimulus with 100% novel items, it can suggest implementing serendipity slowly, as a high level of serendipity out of the blue decreases the ability to perceive serendipity and decreases user satisfaction. 
      This thesis is not suggesting the right algorithmic design that should be implemented in VOD environments. Instead, the study sheds light on the underrepresentation of serendipitous items. Similar to Gomez-Uribe and Hunt (2015), a suggestion for VOD companies is to conduct randomized and controlled experiments in the form of A/B testing. For example, the representation of serendipitous items is increased for selected participants and the actions following the change in the algorithmic design are tracked. A control group is included to compare the performance of the recommendation system between both groups. 

20.3 	5.3 Limitations
      As with any research, this thesis is not without limitations. These limitations are presented in this section. First of all, the low reliability of the consumer characteristic knowledge is highlighted once more. As no previous academic literature provided a scale to uncover the level of knowledge by consumers, a knowledge scale is established from four possible characteristics as derived from literature. Three out of five statements are deleted to increase the reliability of the scale. By removing those statements, the description of the variable knowledge was narrowed to solely one criterion: developed TV show/movie preferences. This criterion recorded the small internal consistency of .58. Although the results of the variable knowledge are questionable, based on Bernardi (1994), the results are not inadmissible.
      A second limitation of this study is found in the presented stimulus. The stimulus is aimed to be 100% serendipity; however, as explained by Maccatrozzo et al. (2017b), the concept of serendipity is subjective. Although the stimulus presents the highest level of novelty, the level of unexpectedness and relevance is different for each participant. The statistical insignificance of the second mediation model (figure 5) confirms the disability of the participants to perceive a coherent serendipity implementation. To illustrate, the items in the stimulus suggest genres by presenting conventional images of a particular genre. For example, the genre horror is presented with a hand from a grave (figure 2). It is, however, possible that participants did not perceive their preferred genres from the images. As a result, it is possible that 100% novelty is perceived and 0% relevance. Hence, the stimulus did not present serendipity to the participant. 
      Third, combining serendipity elements novelty and unexpectedness limited the results, as the effect sizes of novelty and unexpectedness could not be measured separately. As discussed by Kotkov et al. (2018a), the level of all serendipity elements should be able to be perceived on their own. In combining these two elements, the importance and effect of each item are dismissed. 
      Furthermore, a limitation of this thesis is the skewed sample. Using a snowball effect to obtain new participants, limited the diversity of the sample as 66.6% of the participants selected a Dutch nationality. Also, more than half of all participants have completed a bachelor's degree or higher. To generalize the results of this study, the sample should be representable for all users of VOD platforms. The results of this thesis might be generalizable for the highly educated Dutch population; however, the results could deviate if another nationality is overrepresented.  
      Fifth, the stimulus represents the layout of Netflix. Although Netflix is the most preferred platform, 14.1% of the participants prefer another VOD platform. These consumers have less knowledge on the design of the layout and might not know how to perceive the recommendations. This could affect the knowledgeable consumers and influence user satisfaction. 
      Last, consumers watch VOD content on multiple devices, such as a mobile phone, television, or laptop. The VOD layout of each device differentiates, and therefore, the perception of serendipity changes. For example, the provided recommendation of Netflix on a mobile device is lower than the recommendations seen in the Netflix layout on a laptop screen. The devices that the participant uses to watch content is not considered. 

20.4 	5.4 Future research
      A suggestion for future research regarding consumer characteristics, serendipity, and user satisfaction, is conducting a mixed method with quantitative and qualitative aspects. A qualitative approach could be used to uncover the need for serendipity more in-depth. For example, interviewing multiple VOD consumers with the four presented personality traits could build on the reliability level of the knowledgeable consumer scale. 
      Another suggestion for future research is an improvement of the stimulus. For example, with a qualitative approach, the stimulus could be adapted to the preferences of participants to ensure the representation of all serendipity components. Moreover, although Netflix is the most preferred VOD platform, the stimulus could be adapted to another VOD platform if Netflix is not selected. Changing the VOD environment to the participant reflects an increased representation of reality, as the interface is personalized. 
	Third, the coping potential by Maccatrozzo et al. (2017b) could be further integrated into the design of this study. As discussed, consumers were unable to cope with the level of serendipity presented in the stimulus. Future research could, therefore, create a more balanced implemented serendipity level to uncover when the coping ability of the consumers is maximized. 
	Last, to expand the evaluation of the performance of recommendation systems, preference broadening could be added as another potential outcome. Preference broadening is already included in the serendipity scale by Kotkov et al. (2018a), and therefore, easy to explore with the collected data. Another addition to this study, besides increasing the scope of the study by adding an extra outcome, is implementing other consumer characteristics, such as the personality trait of curiosity, as put forward in Maccatrozzo et al. (2017a).



21 6. CONCLUSION

      This section expresses concluding remarks on the study object of serendipity in VOD environments perceived and assessed by consumers with particular characteristics. The following research question is central in this study:

To what extent do users perceive and are affected by serendipity in VOD layouts?

	The relatively new research field of serendipity in recommendation systems is increasingly explored since the growing dependence of algorithmic designs by consumers and the existence of filter bubbles and echo chambers (Saat et al., 2018; Banker & Khetani, 2019). The VOD market, an even newer field of research, is expanding in competitors and consumers and incorporates recommendation systems for marketing and competitive purposes. Therefore, the concept of serendipity within recommendation systems is increasingly linked to VOD environments. To known knowledge, Maccatrozzo et al. (2017a) is the first and only to investigate the effect of consumer characteristics on user profiles and therefore uncovers the need for serendipitous items that eventually lead to increased user satisfaction. Building on the suggested personality trait, curiosity, this thesis investigated other consumer characteristics that are potentially in need of a higher serendipity level. 
      The first aim of this study was to uncover the perception of serendipity based on four consumer characteristics: (1) hours spent on VOD platforms, (2) knowledgeable consumers, (3) broad interest in genre, and (4) users' need for uniqueness. According to Kotkov et al. (2018b), serendipity is perceived if consumers consider a recommendation novel, unexpected, and relevant. Interestingly, this thesis did not find evidence that a combination of all serendipity elements is perceived in personalized recommendations by VOD companies. Additionally, in the stimulus with 100% novel items a combination of all serendipity items was not perceived by consumers. The findings of this thesis, therefore, contradict the conclusions by Ricci et al. (2012) that serendipity is included in VOD recommendation systems. For future research, it is important that the level of serendipity implementation is based on consumer characteristics that express a higher need.
      The thesis had a second aim to find evidence of the mediating role of serendipity. This thesis contributes to the results of Chen et al. (2019) that discusses serendipity as the mediating component to assess the performance of recommendation systems. Increasing the serendipity component of novelty to 100% in the stimulus influences the outcome of user satisfaction. Although no conclusions can be drawn regarding the perception of serendipity in the stimulus due to the subjective character of unexpectedness and relevance, the evidence of serendipity as a mediator is substantial. Therefore, a suggestion for an institutional implication is made that VOD companies should experiment to find the right balance of serendipity elements in recommendation algorithms. 
      The final aim of this thesis was to measure the extent to which consumers are affected by serendipitous items by means of evaluating their level of user satisfaction. Contrary to Matt et al. (2014), the combining element of novelty and unexpectedness present a small negative effect on user satisfaction. According to Maccatrozzo et al. (2017a), the negative result indicates that consumers were unable to cope with the suggestions of novel and unexpected items. Additionally, the stimulus with 100% novel items learned that consumers were unable to cope with this level of novelty. In line with Kotkov et al. (2018b), relevant recommendations record a sizeable positive effect on user satisfaction in the serendipity scale before and after the stimulus. Therefore, this thesis concludes that relevance is the most important element of serendipity. 
      To known knowledge, this thesis is the second attempt, besides the study conducted by Maccatrozzo et al. (2017a), that considers the need for serendipity for specific consumer characteristics in VOD environments. The growing VOD catalog and growing dependence on recommendation systems call for the right application of algorithms, including the element of serendipity. It is the rightful duty of VOD companies to educate their consumers by highlighting different perspectives on structural mindsets through serendipitous items. By means of including the presented consumer characteristics in user profiles, the coping ability and need for serendipity are reflected in the algorithmic design and, therefore, the personalized VOD interface. The implementation of serendipity based on consumer characteristics helps consumers to broaden their preferences and VOD companies to increasingly set foot in the evolving market.





22 REFERENCES

Almeida Lima, C., Gouveia Moreira, D., Costa Calazans, J. (2015). Netflix and the maintenance of television genres out of the flow. Matrizes, 9(2), 237-255. http://dx.doi.org/10.11.606/issn.1982-8160.v9.i2p.237-256
Ban, T. A. (2006). The role of serendipity in drug discovery. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 8(3), 335-344. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3181823/
Banker, S., & Khetani, S. (2019). Algorithm Overdependence: How the Use of Algorithmic Recommendation Systems Can Increase Risks to Consumer Well-Being. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 38(4), 500-515. https://doi.org/10.1177/0743915619858057
Barnes, B. (2019, November 10). Netflix Was Only the Start: Disney Streaming Service Shakes an Industry. The New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/10/business/media/Disney-Plus-streaming.html
Barnes, B. (2020, February 4). Disney Plus Racks Up 28.6 Million Subscribers. The New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2020/02/04/business/media/disney-earnings.html
Bennett, J., & Lanning, S. (2007). The Netflix Prize. In Proceedings of KDD Cup and Workshop (pp. 3 - 6). San Jose, California, USA. Retrieved from http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.117.8094&rep=rep1&type=pdf
Bernardi, R. A. (1994). Validating Research Results when Cronbach'S Alpha is Below .70: A Methodological Procedure. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 54(3), 766-775. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013164494054003023 
Berry, S., Fazzio, S., Zhou, Y., Scott, B., & Francisco-Revilla, L. (2010). Netflix recommendations for groups. Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 47(1), 1-3. https://doi.org/10.1002/meet.14504701402
Bhattacharya, S., Gollapudi, S., & Munagala, K. (2011). Consideration set generation in commerce search. Presented at the Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on World Wide Web, Hyderabad, India. https://doi.org/10.1145/1963405.1963452
Biernacki, P., & Waldorf, D. (1981). Snowball Sampling: Problems and Techniques of Chain Referral Sampling. Sociological Methods & Research, 10(2), 141-163. https://doi.org/10.1177/004912418101000205
Bozdag, E. (2015). Bursting the filter bubble: Democracy, design, and ethics. Delft, The Netherlands: Technische Universiteit Delft. https://doi.org/10.4233/uuid:87bde0a2-c391-4c77-8457-97cba93abf45
Bressan, M., Leucci, S., Panconesi, A., Raghavan, P., & Terolli, E. (2016). The Limits of Popularity-Based Recommendations, and the Role of Social Ties. Presented at the KDD '16: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, San Francisco, United States. https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939797
Calder, B. J., Phillips, L. W., & Tybout, A. M. (1981). Designing Research for Application. Journal of Consumer Research, 8(2), 197-207. https://doi.org/10.1086/208856
Chaney, A. J. B., Stewart, B. M., & Engelhardt, B. E. (2018). How algorithmic confounding in recommendation systems increases homogeneity and decreases utility. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems (pp. 224-232). https://doi.org/10.1145/3240323.3240370
Chen, L., Yang, Y., Wang, N., Yang, K., & Yuan, Q. (2019). How Serendipity Improves User Satisfaction with Recommendations? A Large-Scale User Evaluation. In Proceeding of the 2019 World Wide Web Conference (pp. 240-250). https://doi.org/10.1145/3308558.3313469
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2018). Research Methods in Education (8th ed.). Abingdon, United Kingdom: Routledge. ISBN 9781138209886.
De Vriendt, J., Degrande, N., & Verhoeyen, M. (2011). Video content recommendation: An overview and discussion on technologies and business models. Bell Labs Technical Journal, 16(2), 235-250. https://doi.org/10.1002/bltj.20513
DeVellis, R. F. (2003). Scale development: Theory and applications (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. ISBN 9781506341569
Dew, N. (2009). Serendipity in entrepreneurship. Organization Studies, 30(7), 735-753. https://doi.org/10.1177/0170840609104815
Ekstrand, M. D., Maxwell Harper, F., Willemsen, M. C., & Konstan, J. A. (2014). User perception of differences in recommender algorithms. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Recommender systems (pp. 161-168). https://doi.org/10.1145/2645710.2645737
Etikan, I., Musa, S. A., & Alkassim, R. S. (2016). Comparison of Convenience Sampling and Purposive Sampling. American Journal of Theoretical and Applied Statistics, 5(1), 1-4. https://doi.org/10.11648/j.ajtas.20160501.11 
Eordogh, F. (2019, February 18). YouTube's Related Video Algorithm Helpful To Predators. Retrieved from https://www.forbes.com/sites/fruzsinaeordogh/2019/02/18/youtubes-related-video-algorithm-helpful-to-predators/#2e7256774872
Foster, A., & Ford, N. (2003). Serendipity and information seeking: an empirical study. Journal of Documentation, 59(3), 321-340. https://doi.org/10.1108/00220410310472518 
George, D., & Mallery, P. (2016). IBM SPSS Statistics 23 Step by Step (14th ed.). Abingdon, United Kingdom: Routledge. ISBN 9781138681347
Ghazanfar, M. A., & Prigel-Bennett, A. (2010). A Scalable, Accurate Hybrid Recommender System. Presented at the Third International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Phuket, Thailand. https://doi.org/10.1109/WKDD.2010.117
Golin, M. (1957). Serendipity - Big word in medical progress: Does pure luck deserve all the credit?.  Journal of the American Medical Association, 165(16), 2084-2087. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.1957.72980340011013
Golafshani, N. (2003). Understanding Reliability and Validity in Qualitative Research. The Qualitative Report, 8(4), 597-607. Retrieved from http://www.brown.uk.com/teaching/HEST5001/golafshani.pdf 
Gomez-Uribe, C. A., & Hunt, N. (2015). The Netflix Recommender System: Algorithms, Business Value, and Innovation. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems, 6(4), 1-19. https://doi.org/10.1145/2843948
Goodman, J. K., Broniarczyk, S. M., Griffin, J. G., & McAlister, L. (2013). Help or hinder? When recommendation signage expands consideration sets and heightens decision difficulty. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 23(2), 165-174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcps.2012.06.003
Grange, C., Benbasat, I., & Burton-Jones, A. (2019). With a little help from my friends: Cultivating serendipity in online shopping environments. Information & Management, 56(2), 225-235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2018.06.001
Haim, M., Graefe, A., & Brosius, H. B. (2018). Burst of the filter bubble? Digital Journalism, 6(3), 330-343. https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2017.1338145
Hallinan, B., & Striphas, T. (2014). Recommended for you: The Netflix Prize and the production of algorithmic culture. New Media & Society, 18(1), 117-137. https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444814538646
Häubl, G., & Trifts, V. (2000). Consumer Decision Making in Online Shopping Environments: The Effects of Interactive Decision Aids. Marketing Science, 19(1), 4-21. https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.19.1.4.15178
Hayes, A. F. (2017). Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional Process Analysis (2nd ed.). New York, United States: Guilford publications. ISBN 9781462534654.
Hilderbrand, L. (2010). The Art of Distribution: Video on Demand. Film Quarterly, 64(2), 24-28. https://doi.org/10.1525/fq.2010.64.2.24
Horeck, T., Jenner, M., & Kendall, T. (2018). On binge-watching: Nine critical propositions. Critical Studies in Television: The International Journal of Television Studies, 13(4), 499-504. https://doi.org/10.1177/1749602018796754
Jenner, M. (2014). Is this TVIV? On Netflix, TVIII and binge-watching. New Media & Society, 18(2), 257-273. https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444814541523
Jenner, M. (2015). Binge-watching: Video-on-demand, quality TV and mainstreaming fandom. International Journal of Cultural Studies, 20(3), 304-320. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367877915606485
Johnson, C. (2017). Beyond catch-up: VoD interfaces, ITV Hub and the repositioning of television online. Critical Studies in Television: The International Journal of Television Studies, 12(2), 121-138. https://doi.org/10.1177/1749602017698159
Kaminskas, M., & Bridge, D. (2014). Measuring Surprise in Recommender Systems. Presented at Recommender Systems Evaluation: Dimensions and Design, Silicon Valley, United States. Retrieved from http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.707.7596&rep=rep1&type=pdf
Knijnenburg, B. P., Willemsen, M. C., Gantner, Z., Soncu, H., & Newell, C. (2012). Explaining the user experience of recommender systems. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 22, 441-504. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11257-011-9118-4
Konstan, J. A., & Riedl, J. (2012). Recommender systems: from algorithms to user experience. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 22(1-2), 101-123. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11257-011-9112-x
Kotkov, D., Konstan, J. A., Zhao, Q., & Veijalainen, J. (2018a). Investigating serendipity in recommender systems based on real user feedback. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (pp. 1341-1350). Pau, France. https://doi.org/10.1145/3167132.3167276
Kotkov, D., Veijalainen, J., & Wang, S. (2018b). How does serendipity affect diversity in recommender systems? A serendipity-oriented greedy algorithm. Computing, 102(2), 393-411. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00607-018-0687-5
Lee, E. (2019, July 9). 'Friends' to Leave Netflix for HBO Max, AT&T's New Streaming Service. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/09/business/media/hbo-max-friends-netflix.html 
Maccatrozzo, V. (2012). Burst the Filter Bubble: Using Semantic Web to Enable Serendipity. In International Semantic Web Conference (pp. 391-398). Berlin, Germany. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-35173-0_28
Maccatrozzo, V., van Everdingen, E., Aroyo, L., & Schreiber, G. (2017a). Everybody, More or Less, likes Serendipity. In Adjunct Publication of the 25th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization (pp. 29-34). Bratislava, Slovakia. https://doi.org/10.1145/3099023.3099064
Maccatrozzo, V., Terstall, M., Aroyo, L., & Schreiber, G. (2017b). SIRUP: Serendipity in Recommendations via User Perceptions. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (pp. 35-44). Limassol, Cyprus. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025171.3025185
Malhotra, N. K. (1982). Information Load and Consumer Decision Making. Journal of Consumer Research, 8(4), 419-430. https://doi.org/10.1086/208882
Matrix, S. (2014). The Netflix Effect: Teens, Binge Watching, and On-Demand Digital Media Trends. Jeunesse: Young People, Texts, Cultures, 6(1), 119-138. https://doi.org/10.1353/jeu.2014.0002 
Matt, C., Benlian, A., Hess, T., & Weiß, C. (2014). Escaping from the Filter Bubble? The Effects of Novelty and Serendipity on Users' Evaluations of Online Recommendations. Presented at the Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information Systems, Auckland, New Zealand. Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/publication/272723200_Escaping_from_the_Filter_Bubble_The_Effects_of_Novelty_and_Serendipity_on_Users'_Evaluations_of_Online_Recommendations 
Matthews, B., & Ross, L. (2010). Research Methods. A practical guide for the social sciences. Harlow, United Kingdom: Pearson Education.
Möller, J., Trilling, D., Helberger, N., & van Es, B. (2018). Do not blame it on the algorithm: an empirical assessment of multiple recommender systems and their impact on content diversity. Information, Communication & Society, 21(7), 959-977. https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2018.1444076
Nguyen, T. T., Hui, P. M., Harper, F. M., Terveen, L., & Konstan, J. A. (2014). Exploring the filter bubble: the effect of using recommender systems on content diversity. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web (pp. 677-686). Seoul, Korea. https://doi.org/10.1145/2566486.2568012
O'Reilly, T., & Battelle, J. (2009). Web squared: Web 2.0 five years on (1st ed.). Retrieved from https://books.google.nl/books?hl=nl&lr=&id=UC5sB9xS9E0C&oi=fnd&pg=PT3&dq=Web+squared:+Web+2.0+five+years+on.+&ots=GCBrcfFZFr&sig=6VplyujdBH3u8a9KTk8FwcZfHdc#v=onepage&q=Web%20squared%3A%20Web%202.0%20five%20years%20on.&f=false
Orphanides, K. G. (2019). On YouTube, a network of paedophiles is hiding in plain sight. Retrieved from https://www.wired.co.uk/article/youtube-pedophile-videos-advertising
Pallant, J. (2016). SPSS Survival Manual (6th ed.). McGraw-Hill: Open University Press. ISBN-13: 978-0-33-526154-3
Pariser, E. (2011). The filter bubble: What the Internet is hiding from you. New York, United States: The Penguin Press. eISBN 978-1-101-51512-9
Pett, M. A., Lackey, N. R., & Sullivan, J. J. (2003). Making sense of factor analysis. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. ISBN 0-7619-1950-3
Pripužić, K., Žarko, I. P., Podobnik, V., Lovrek, I., Čavka, M., Petković, I., ... Gojčeta, M. (2013). Building an IPTV VoD recommender system: An experience report. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Telecommunications (pp. 155-162). Zagreb, Croatia. eISBN 978-953-184-180-1
Ricci, F., Rokach, L., & Shapira, B. (2012). Recommender Systems Handbook (2nd ed.). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-7637-6
Ruvio, A., Shoham, A., & Makovec Brenčič, M. (2008). Consumers' need for uniqueness: short‐form scale development and cross‐cultural validation. International Marketing Review, 25(1), 33-53. https://doi.org/10.1108/02651330810851872
Saat, N. I. Y., Noah, S. A. M., & Mohd, M. (2018). Towards Serendipity for Content-Based Recommender Systems. International Journal on Advanced Science, Engineering and Information Technology, 8(4-2), 1762-1769. Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Shahrul_Azman_Mohd_Noah/publication/328919677_Towards_Serendipity_for_Content-Based_Recommender_Systems/links/5ca43b1c299bf1b86d60fa21/Towards-Serendipity-for-Content-Based-Recommender-Systems.pdf
Shaw, L. (2020, April 29). 'The Last Dance' Overtakes 'Tiger King' as World's Top Documentary. Retrieved from https://www.bloomberg.com/tosv2.html?vid=&uuid=e0505680-a403-11ea-bacf-59485da4d6c5&url=L25ld3MvYXJ0aWNsZXMvMjAyMC0wNC0yOS8tdGhlLWxhc3QtZGFuY2Utb3ZlcnRha2VzLXRpZ2VyLWtpbmctYXMtd29ybGQtcy10b3AtZG9jdW1lbnRhcnk= 
Shocker, A., Ben-Akiva, M., Boccara, B., & Nedungadi, P. (1991). Consideration Set Influences on Consumer Decision-Making and Choice: Issues, Models, and Suggestions. Marketing Letter, 2(3), 181-197. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00554125 
Silveira, T., Rocha, L., Mourão, F., & Gonçalves, M. (2017). A framework for unexpectedness evaluation in recommendation. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Applied Computing (pp. 1662-1667). https://doi.org/10.1145/3019612.3019760
Silveira, T., Zhang, M., Lin, X., Liu, Y., & Ma, S. (2019). How good your recommender system is? A survey on evaluations in recommendation. International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 10(5), 813-831. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13042-017-0762-9
Snyder, C. R. (1992). Product Scarcity by Need for Uniqueness Interaction: A Consumer Catch-22 Carousel?. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 13(1), 9-24. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15324834basp1301_3
Soares, M., & Viana, P. (2015). Tuning metadata for better movie content-based recommendation systems. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 74(17), 7015-7036. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-014-1950-1
Spohr, D. (2017). Fake news and ideological polarization: Filter bubbles and selective exposure on social media. Business Information Review, 34(3), 150-160. https://doi.org/10.1177/0266382117722446
Statista Research Department. (2019, December 13). Most popular movie genres in North America from 1995 to 2019. Retrieved from: https://www.statista.com/statistics/188658/movie-genres-in-north-america-by-box-office-revenue-since-1995/ 
Statista Research Department. (2020a, January 18). Most in-demand TV genres in the U.S. 2019, by share of demand. Retrieved from: https://www.statista.com/statistics/1035741/most-in-demand-tv-genres-us-share/ 
Statista Research Department. (2020b, February 18). SVOD services: subscriptions in Europe 2018. Retrieved from: https://www.statista.com/statistics/832038/most-popular-svod-services-in-the-eu/
Tabachnick, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (2013). Using Multivariate Statistics (6th ed.). Harlow, United Kingdom: Pearson Education. ISBN 1-292-02131-4
Tian, K. T., Bearden, W. O., & Hunter, G. L. (2001). Consumers' Need for Uniqueness: Scale Development and Validation. Journal of Consumer Research, 28(1), 50-66. https://doi.org/10.1086/321947
Towse, R. (2010). A Textbook of Cultural Economics. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-71702-1
Van Andel, P. (1994). Anatomy of the Unsought Finding. serendipity: Origin, History, Domains, Traditions, Appearances, Patterns and Programmability. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 45(2), 631-648. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjps/45.2.631
Van Griethuijsen, R. A. L. F., van Eijck, M. W., Haste, H., den Brok, P. J., Skinner, N. C., Mansour, N., ... BouJaoude, S. (2014). Global Patterns in Students' Views of Science and Interest in Science. Research in Science Education, 45(4), 581-603. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11165-014-9438-6 
Vozalis, E., & Margaritis, K. G. (2003). Analysis of Recommender Systems' Algorithms. In The 6th Hellenic European Conference on Computer Mathematics & its Applications (pp. 732-745). Athens, Greece. Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Konstantinos_G_Margaritis/publication/27383115_Analysis_of_Recommender_Systems'_Algorithms/links/0912f50dae2a421daa000000/Analysis-of-Recommender-Systems-Algorithms.pdf
Wayne, M. L. (2018). Netflix, Amazon, and branded television content in subscription video on-demand portals. Media, Culture & Society, 40(5), 725-741. https://doi.org/10.1177/0163443717736118
Winter, G. (2000). A Comparative Discussion of the Notion of 'Validity' in Qualitative and Quantitative Research. The Qualitative Report, 4(3), 1-14. Retrieved from https://nsuworks.nova.edu/tqr/vol4/iss3/4/ 
Xiao, B., & Benbasat, I. (2007). E-commerce product recommendation agents: use, characteristics, and impact. MIS quarterly, 31(1), 137-209. https://doi.org/10.2307/25148784 
Yu, H., Wang, Y., Fan, Y., Meng, S., & Huang, R. (2017, July). Accuracy Is Not Enough: Serendipity Should Be Considered More. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Innovative Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing (pp. 231-241). Torino, Italy. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-61542-4_22
Zhang, Y. C., Séaghdha, D. O., Quercia, D., & Jambor, T. (2012). Auralist: introducing serendipity into music recommendation. In Proceedings of the fifth ACM international conference on Web search and data mining (pp. 13-22). https://doi.org/10.1145/2124295.2124300
23 
APPENDIX A. SURVEY

**Please read the text below carefully**

Dear respondent, 

Thank you for participating in this survey regarding recommendations based on consumer characteristics on Video-on-Demand platforms, such as Netflix, Amazon Prime Video and Videoland. Your participation and time contribute greatly to my research. This study is conducted by Anne Claire Kofflard, MA Media and Creative Industry student at Erasmus University Rotterdam. 

To participate in this study, the following requirements apply: 
- You are subscribed to at least one Video-on-Demand platform
- You possess your own Video-on-Demand profile without other people watching on that particular profile. See the image below for an example.



This survey will take approximately 7 minutes. Your answers given in the survey in the survey are confidential, anonymous and handled with care. Participation is voluntary and if there are questions you don't feel comfortable to answer, feel free to stop. 

If you have any question or concerns, please contact me (Anne Claire Kofflard) via 386160ak@eur.nl. 

If you are willing to participate in this study and agree that your answers are being used for the purpose of this study, please select 'Agree'. If you do not consent, please select 'Disagree' and close this website. 
 Agree
    Disagree

1. FILTER AND CONTROL QUESTIONS

a. Are you a user of at least one Video-on-demand (VOD) platform?
 Yes
 No

b. Do you have a user profile on a VOD platform where you are the only consumer? See the image below for an example
 Yes
 No



c. On which VOD platforms do you have your own user profile? Multiple platforms can be selected.
 Netflix
 Disney+
 Amazon Prime Video
 Apple TV
 Hulu
 Videoland
 Ziggo Movies and Series
 NPO start
 Film 1
 Other [...text...]

d. What is your most used VOD platform where you have your own user profile? 
 Netflix
 Disney+
 Amazon Prime Video
 Apple TV
 Hulu
 Videoland
 Ziggo Movies and Series
 NPO start
 Film 1
 Other [...text...]

2. SERENDIPITY

For the following questions it is important to know what recommendations on VOD platforms are. Recommendations on VOD platforms are personalized selections of TV shows and movies that might be interesting for you to watch. All the movies and TV shows that you see on, for example the homepage on [answer 1d], are considered recommendations. VOD companies base their recommendation on your previous viewing behavior. 


The following questions are about the provided recommendations on your most used VOD platform: [answer 1d]. You can have a look at [answer 1d] while answering. To what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements? 
 
Strongly disagreeSomewhat disagreeNeither agree nor disagreeSomewhat agreeStrongly agree1. The recommendations on [answer 1d] suggest TV shows/movie that I have never heard of.2. The recommendations on [answer 1d] influence my decisions to watch TV shows/movies.3. I enjoy recommended TV shows/movies on [answer 1d].4. The recommendations on [answer 1d] are TV shows/movies I would not normally discover on my own. 5. The recommendations on [answer 1d] are different (e.g., in style, genre, topic) from the TV shows/movies I usually watch.6. I am surprised by the TV shows/movies on [answer 1d] that are recommended to me.7. The recommendations on [answer 1d] suggest TV shows/movie that are relevant for me.8. I am satisfied with the TV shows/movies on [answer 1d] that are recommended to me.9. The recommendations on [answer 1d] broadened my interest in a wider selection of TV shows/movies

3. CONSUMER CHARACTERISTICS

a. How many hours do you spent on [answer 1d] per week on average? (no judgement ;))
[...text...]

b. Knowledge
To what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements? 

Strongly disagreeSomewhat disagreeNeither agree nor disagreeSomewhat agreeStrongly agree1. Before watching TV shows/movies on [answer 1d] I do research to find out if it is worth watching.2. I never follow provided recommendations on [answer 1d].3. When I want to watch TV shows/movies, I look through the recommendations on [answer 1d] before I make a decision. 4. When I open [answer 1d], I know exactly what I want to watch.5. When I open [answer 1d], I know exactly what kind of TV shows/movies I prefer.
c. Broad genre interest
Which genres are you interested in? Multiple options can be selected. 
 Action
 Comedy
 Romantic comedy
 Last saved by Anne claire Kofflardentary
 Drama
 Historical Drama
 Horror
 Thriller
 Arthouse
 Crime
 Science fiction and fantasy
 Musical 
 Mystery
 War
 Sport
 Western
 Animation
 Other [...text...]

d. Users' need for uniqueness 
Creative choice
Strongly disagreeSomewhat disagreeNeither agree nor disagreeSomewhat agreeStrongly agree1. I actively seek to develop my personal uniqueness by watching unique and special TV shows/movies.2. Having an eye for TV shows/movies that are interesting and unusual assists me in establishing a distinctive image.
Unpopular choice
Strongly disagreeSomewhat disagreeNeither agree nor disagreeSomewhat agreeStrongly agree3. I enjoy challenging the prevailing taste of people I know by watching something they would not seem to accept.
Avoidance of similarity
Strongly disagreeSomewhat disagreeNeither agree nor disagreeSomewhat agreeStrongly agree4. When a TV show/movie I watch(ed) becomes popular among the general public, I begin to value it less.5. I often try to avoid TV shows/movies that I know are watched by the general population.6. The more common a TV show/movie is among the general population, the less interested I am in watching it. 
Please take a look at some provided recommendations on a VOD platform on the next page. You are able to continue the survey after 30 seconds. 

4. STIMULUS (100% SERENDIPITY)



The following questions are about the provided recommendations in the image on the previous page/above. Again, recommendations on VOD platforms are all the movies and TV shows that you see on the provided image.

To what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements?
Strongly disagreeSomewhat disagreeNeither agree nor disagreeSomewhat agreeStrongly agree1. The recommendations showed in the image suggest TV shows/movies that I have never heard of.2. The recommendations showed in the image influence my decisions to watch TV shows/movies.3.  I enjoy the recommended TV shows/movies showed in the image.4. The recommendations showed in the image are TV shows/movies I would not normally discover on my own.5. The recommendations showed in the image are different (e.g., in style, genre, topic) from the TV shows/movies I usually watch.6. I am surprised by the TV shows/movies that are recommended to me.7. The recommendations showed in the image suggest TV shows/movie that are relevant for me.8. I am satisfied with the recommended TV shows/movies showed in the image.9. The recommendations showed in the image broadened my interest in a wider selection of TV shows/movies.


5. DEMOGRAPHICS

a. Age
[...text...]

b. Gender
 Female 
 Male 
 Prefer not to say
 Other [...text...]

c. Nationality 
[...selection box...]

d. Please select the box of the highest completed educational degree.
 No education
 High school graduate
 Secondary vocational education (MBO)
 Higher professional education (HBO)
 Bachelor's degree
 Master's degree
 Doctorate/Phd

Thank you for taking the time to fill in this survey. Your answers are recorded. If you have any questions, please contact me (386160ak@eur.nl).



24 APPENDIX B. LINKS STIMULUS

Recommended for you - row
* Pedersen: https://picsart.com/ja_jp/i/image-freetoedit-stairs-stair-staircase-man-men-dark-301122216118201 
* Life with kids: https://chewsglutenfree.wordpress.com/tag/fatigue-2/ 
* Universal City: http://www.previewmag.nl/specials/220615-wat-is-sciencefiction/ 
* Lieutenant Jones: https://www.itl.cat/wallview/mmRxT_army-soldier-background-wallpaper-army-fight-background/ 
* Will: https://www.scottcouncil.com/portraits/will-smith/1/ 
* How K-pop prevails: https://shilpaahuja.com/kpop-fashion/ 

Top 10 in the Netherlands - row
* To the moon: https://www.shutterstock.com/nl/image-photo/crescent-moon-miniature-men-women-440160910
* Louisa IX: https://nl.dreamstime.com/stock-foto-vrouw-victoriaanse-kleding-image49318094 
* Crime Department: https://www.gq.com/story/dropping-knowledge-the-trench-coat
* Animal Kingdom: https://www.britannica.com/animal/tiger/Tigers-and-humans
* Kobe Bryant: https://www.artphotolimited.com/us-en/fine-art-photography/sport/team-sports/basketball/photo/l-equipe/kobe-bryant-dunk and https://www.clipart.email/make-a-clipart/?image=19624483 
* Make up dad: https://www.dreamstime.com/stock-photo-father-daughter-play-funny-time-his-child-playing-home-cute-girl-doing-makeup-to-her-dad-sitting-bed-image90678501 



Popular - row
* Amitabh Bachchan: https://www.teahub.io/viewwp/ioThbiT_amitabh-bachchan-old-man/ 
* Sarah Adams - Flurry: https://www.google.com/search?q=stand+up+comedian&tbm=isch&ved=2ahUKEwi-tK6NyLPpAhVKDOwKHUilArQQ2-cCegQIABAA&oq=stand+up+&gs_lcp=CgNpbWcQARgAMgIIADICCAAyAggAMgIIADICCAAyAggAMgIIADICCAAyAggAMgIIADoECCMQJzoECAAQQzoFCAAQgwFQzpsEWO6iBGD3qQRoAHAAeACAAUaIAe8Dkg
* Safari Fiesta: http://www.foodfilmfestival.nl/2013/nl/nieuws/45-FFF_loves_animatie_Rollin_Safari.html 
* Living dead: https://hubpages.com/holidays/Awesome-Halloween-Music 
* Crush: https://www.freepik.com/premium-photo/front-view-group-friends-swimming-pool-party-celebrating-with-white-wine-champagne_6439522.htm 
* Leonardo DiCaprio: https://wildaid.org/leo-dicaprio-2/ 

Trending - row
* Aqua Peligrosa: https://funnyjunk.com/Someone+in+water/funny-pictures/5637535/
* Crossing: https://lexusenthusiast.com/2016/05/10/autotrader-lexus-lcertified-is-the-top-pre-certified-luxury-program-in-the-usa/ 
* Gränslös: https://www.nu.nl/cd-recensies/3669109/ricky-koole---use-crying.html
* Hunter: https://www.shutterstock.com/nl/video/clip-10258106-car-explosion-on-field-sedan-side-view
* Spenser: https://www.freepik.com/premium-photo/asian-fat-man-eating-donuts-plate_5050576.htm 
* A dog's world: https://www.pexels.com/photo/adorable-blur-breed-close-up-406014/ 

Because you watched Friends - row
* NPH: http://onegrandbooks.com/shop/curators/neil-patrick-harris/
* Dinner Plans: https://nl.pinterest.com/pin/67624431889303040/
* Our Nature by David: http://www.labellecampagne.fr/
* Father's Day: https://teamtrips.com.au/brisbane-cricket-trips-the-don-package.html
* On trial: https://www.theatermania.com/shows/new-york-city-theater/off-broadway/the-courtroom_333203
* 30: https://www.menshealth.com/uk/health/a749881/13-tips-to-combat-a-hangover/ 


25 APPENDIX C. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

Table 1: Descriptive statistics: gender, nationality and highest completed education with N = 290
VariableNumber of participantsPercentage of participantsGender
Female
Male
Prefer not to say
Other
174
114
1
1
60,0%
39,3%
0,3%
0,3%Highest completed education
No education
High school graduate
Secondary vocational education (MBO)
Higher Professional education (HBO)
Bachelor's degree
Master's degree
Doctorate/Phd
1
47
13
30
99
94
6
0,3%
16,2%
4,5%
10,3%
34,1%
32,4%
2,1%



Table 2: Descriptive statistics: Nationality
VariableNumber of participantsPercentage of participantsNationality
Austria
Belgium
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
Congo, Republic of the...
Czech Republic
Denmark
Dominican Republic
France
Germany
Greece
Hongkong (S.A.R.)
Hungary
India
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Republic of Korea
Romania
Russian Federation
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of... 
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
1
1
20
2
1
1
4
3
1
193
1
10
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
22

7
4
0,3%
0,3%
0,3%
0,7%
0,7%
0,3%
0,3%
0,7%
0,3%
0,3%
6,9%
0,7%
0,3%
0,3%
1,4%
1,0%
0,3%
66,6%
0,3%
3,4%
0,3%
0,3%
0,3%
0,3%
0,7%
0,3%
0,3%
7,6%

2,4%
1,4%







To watch or not to watch
The influence of Netflix's recommendation algorithm on subscription members' behavioral intentions and recommendation adoption







Student Name:	Nhu Anh Nguyen
Student Number:	465192

Supervisor: 		Dr. João Fernando Ferreira Gonçalves    

Master Media Studies - Media & Creative Industries
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication
Erasmus University Rotterdam

Master's Thesis 
June 2021






To watch or not to watch
The influence of Netflix's recommendation algorithm and its characteristics on subscription members' behavioral intentions and recommendation adoption

ABSTRACT

In this day and age, algorithms have become part of everyday practices. Especially in the growing streaming media industry, algorithmic recommendation systems play an important role in guiding users by suggesting movies and shows to watch. Netflix, the leader in the streaming services industry, has a developed recommender system which challenges viewing practices and is increasingly playing a role in subscription members' watching behavior. This study aims to investigate how people perceive algorithmic recommenders and to what extent these perceptions are associated with intentions to use the recommender system to find something to watch, as well as users' actual adoption of the recommendations presented to them by Netflix's recommender system. Importantly, attitude was examined as a potential mediator in the relationships between perceptions - perceived source credibility and perceived personalization - and intentions to use the recommender system. Recommendation adoption was contextualized by measuring whether people show a higher preference for peer recommendations or recommendations by Netflix. A quantitative survey was distributed among 289 current Netflix users who were 18 years or older. Respondents were mainly found through Instagram, SurveySwap, and Reddit. Mediation analyses using Hayes' (2017) PROCESS macro in IBM SPSS Statistics 26 showed that perceived source credibility and behavioral intentions are significantly and positively associated, with attitude mediating this effect. Similarly, attitude mediated the relationship between perceived personalization and behavioral intentions. Next, a significant and positive relationship was found between behavioral intentions and recommendation adoption. A paired-samples t-test indicated algorithm aversion, as people showed higher levels of recommendation adoption for peers than for Netflix. The results show that personalization and credibility are key drivers for attitudes, and in turn, attitudes affect intentions and behavior. This study contributes to and expands the current and larger understanding of user perceptions and responses, and the further implications and impacts of this artificial intelligence on society. 

KEYWORDS: Netflix, recommendation algorithm, perceived personalization, source credibility, theory of planned behavior

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

       Throughout the writing of this thesis, a few very important people have contributed to this project. Without them, this thesis would not be what it is today. 
       First and foremost, I cannot express enough thanks to my supervisor João Fernando Ferreira Gonçalves for all the support, feedback, guidance, and encouragement. It was a great privilege and honor to conduct this study under his guidance and I am extremely grateful for everything he has taught and offered me. Another big thank you goes to my supporters at home: my parents Thái Nguyen and Châu Trần, for their caring throughout my studies and sacrifices for preparing me for my future, my brother Thái Sơn Nguyen for always being there, and my boyfriend Rade van Bergen en Henegouwen for his unconditional love and support. I would also like to express my gratitude to the anonymous Netflix users from all around the world who took the time to contribute to and participate in this study by sharing and filling in my survey. 
       And of course, the credits go to Netflix for providing me with the best recommendations so my breaks from this thesis were spent in the most efficient way possible. 
	















26 TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT	2
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT	3
1. Introduction	7
1.1. Societal relevance	9
1.2. Scientific relevance	11
1.3. Chapter outline	12
2. Theoretical framework	14
2.1. Recommender systems	14
2.2. Different recommender types	15
2.2.1. Algorithm appreciation and aversion	15
2.3. Theory of planned behavior	18
2.4. Perceived source credibility	20
2.5. Perceived personalization	22
2.5.1. Perceived personalization influencing attitude and behavioral intentions	24
2.6. Summary	25
3. Method	27
3.1. Choice of method	27
3.2. Research design	29
3.2.1. Survey structure	29
3.2.2. Survey pretests	30
3.2.3. Sampling method	30
3.3. Participants	32
3.3.1. Socio-demographic background	32
3.3.2. Streaming services	33
3.4. Operationalization	36
3.4.1. Attitude	36
3.4.2. Behavioral intentions	37
3.4.3. Netflix recommendation adoption	38
3.4.4. Peer recommendation adoption	39
3.4.5. Perceived source credibility	40
3.4.6. Perceived personalization	42
3.4.7. Control variables	43
3.5. Validity and reliability	44
3.5.1. Validity	44
3.5.2. Reliability	45
3.6. Method of data analysis	46
4. Results	47
4.1. Multicollinearity check	47
4.2. Netflix vs peer recommendation adoption	47
4.3. Mediation analysis of source credibility, attitude, and behavioral intentions	48
4.4. Mediation analysis of perceived personalization, attitude, and behavioral intentions	49
4.5. Behavioral intentions and recommendation adoption	50
4.6. The impact of age, Netflix usage, and familiarity	51
4.7. Hypothesis testing	51
5. Conclusion	53
5.1. Discussion	53
5.2. Practical and societal implications	57
5.3. Limitations	58
5.4. Suggestions for future research	60
5.5. Conclusion	61
References	63
Appendix A. Survey questions	71
Appendix B. Social media advertisement (Instagram Story & Facebook post)	82



1. Introduction

      Today, the role of television in the media industry is not what it used to be due to the rise of online streaming services (Jenner, 2018). Compared to cable and broadcast television, where viewers watch what is being offered, audiences now have more choice and control over what they are going to watch (Pittman & Sheehan, 2015). In fact, viewers can now decide what to watch, when to watch it, and which device to watch it on. Streaming services allow for this flexibility, with a broad catalog consisting of thousands of movies and shows that can be watched at any time, on any device. As said by Schwartz (2015), making a decision when there are so many options available is difficult and overwhelming for the consumer, resulting in poor choices or none at all. However, a benefit that comes with streaming services' broad catalogs is that the content appeals to a wide range of tastes and demographics, including specific titles for specific groups of users. 
      To reduce the negative impact of such overwhelming, big catalogs with many choices, recommender systems have been developed. These recommender systems are software machinery, specifically developed to present appropriate suggestions and recommendations to a particular user (Pazzani & Billsus, 2007). The recommendations are made based on certain filtering techniques, such as similarity in experiences and ratings with other users (the collaborative filtering approach) or users' past behavior and previously liked items (the content-based approach) (Reddy et al., 2019). In essence, the aim of recommender systems is to properly process information on the user and provide satisfactory information and suggestions. These systems are increasingly being developed and becoming popular in various areas. 
      Since the 1990s, recommender systems have played an important role in particularly the commerce and content markets, such as the e-commerce company Amazon and streaming service and former video-rental company Netflix (Konstan & Rield, 2012). The implementation of such systems can be especially beneficial for organizations that collect data on large groups of consumers and want to provide the best recommendations in the most effective way possible. As mentioned above, one of these organizations is the subscription-based streaming service Netflix. Netflix is considered a dominant player in the reorganization of television, and it plays an active role in challenging viewing practices (Jenner, 2018; Lobato & Lotz, 2020). As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, Netflix's paid memberships grew to 208 million in the first quarter of 2021 (Netflix, 2021). These subscription members are located in more than 130 countries and have a collective usage of 6 billion hours per month, showing and contributing to Netflix's position as the largest and leading streaming service in the global industry (Cook, 2021; Rataul, Tisch, & Zamborsky, 2018). However, other streaming services, such as Amazon Prime Video and Disney+ have emerged to not only compete against traditional television, but also against Netflix in this growing global industry of streaming media (Budzinski, Gaenssle, & Lindstädt, 2020).
      So, considering the industry's dynamics and competition, innovation is crucial to maintain the leading position and grow internally (Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015). Therefore, Netflix has developed a personalized algorithm which helps users to find something to watch by recommending content which fits each individual viewer's personal taste (Jenner, 2018). Many attributes are considered when designing the recommender system, such as users' previously liked genres and even actors and directors (Reddy et al., 2019). In other words, Netflix's recommender system takes into account the user's previously watched movies and shows, to provide similar recommendations and help the user find something to watch. 
      The effectiveness of recommender systems is visible in previous studies, which found that algorithms play a big role in people's decisions, even more than advice and recommendations from peers (Montal & Reich, 2017; Shin, Zhong & Biocca, 2020). However, looking further into what actually makes these systems effective and what convinces people to make use of this system is crucial to continue developing and improving this type of technology. To elaborate, in order to understand the societal impacts of algorithms, it is important and beneficial to understand how users encounter and interact with algorithms, and to what extent these experiences shape users' behavior. As stated by Beer (2017), algorithmic systems can "shape decisions or become integrated into the choices that are made" (p. 5), with these choices becoming part of people's lives. In turn, the behavior and interaction from users play a role in shaping the algorithms, resulting in a co-evolutionary process with societies and technologies like algorithms influencing each other and creating reality together (Just & Latzer, 2017). 
      Yet, researchers have lacked in investigating the context of recommender systems implemented by streaming platforms and people's responses to it, and specifically, under which conditions people intend to use the system and actually adopt recommendations made by the system. With the rapid implementation of artificial intelligence and algorithm technologies, user experiences are increasingly improving and systems are widely and pervasively used in society, making it essential to address challenges and contexts (Ettlinger, 2018). For instance, while there is something for everybody in the big catalog, navigating it might be difficult at times. Recommender systems have the practical benefit of simplifying choices available to the user, especially the personalization feature of the algorithms helps to narrow down the options for the user. As this factor is there to help users, it might play a role in their decisions and choices, making it a relevant factor to consider in this study. Also, due to the technological aspect of algorithmic recommenders, it might not be as straightforward to investigate concepts such as trust and expertise. However, in this case, it might be interesting to look into these concepts and better contextualize users' perceptions and behaviors. Gaining insights into these conditions and to what extent people's perceptions impact their likelihood of accepting suggestions from algorithmic recommenders, allows for conclusions to be drawn on the social impact and power of algorithmic recommenders. 
      Thus, to further expand existing literature and current knowledge on this topic, in particular, the factors that influence people's intentions and behavior, this study focuses on Netflix users' perceptions toward the recommender system and the impact on their behavioral intentions and eventual recommendation adoption. To what extent people's perceptions toward algorithmic recommenders and their experience affect their use of platforms that implemented such algorithmic systems, and to what extent attitudes determine behavioral intentions and actual behavior, is reflected upon in this study. By investigating this topic, a better understanding is gained of users' algorithmic experience, their attitudes, intentions and resulting behavior. The findings of the current research can contribute to and build upon existing studies on the impact of algorithms on user perceptions and experiences, as well as their responses to recommendations provided by Netflix's recommender algorithm. Additionally, outcomes can be translated into practical implications for professionals in the field and can potentially serve as a starting point for future research paths while also filling research gaps. All things considered, this thesis aims to answer the following research question: 


RQ: To what extent does Netflix's recommendation algorithm and its characteristics influence subscription members' behavioral intentions and recommendation adoption?


1.1. Societal relevance
      First of all, in this digital age, various technologies have emerged that are now part of almost every aspect of daily life. Through these new technologies, such as apps and web-based services, people have embraced a digital lifestyle which refines viewing practices and options (Crawford, 2015). For instance, entertainment is not limited to cinemas and cable television anymore, but people increasingly seek on-demand streaming services to watch movies, tv shows, and original content created by the streaming services themselves. With this increase in the use of online services, users are also increasingly encountering artificial intelligence, such as algorithms (Willson, 2017). As stated by Just and Latzer (2017), such algorithmic systems play a role in shaping and forming society's everyday life and reality, while also affecting perceptions and actions. Nowadays, people commonly rely on such algorithms for all kinds of advice and information, as these systems are pervasive and the work of algorithms can be observed everywhere. For example, Google search results, recommendations for accounts to follow on social media platforms, and also the rows of movie recommendations on a streaming platform. In this media landscape with infinite information and entertainment, algorithms act as an ever-present feature and play an important role by offering a form of guidance to quickly and effortlessly find the most relevant content (Seaver, 2019). Importantly, according to Gomez-Uribe and Hunt (2015), 80% of what people consume is recommended by an algorithm. All in all, the focus on streaming services and artificial intelligence, recommender systems in particular, is important in this day and age because on-demand services and algorithms are increasingly being integrated into everyday life and impact the contemporary everyday practices and understandings. 
      Next, cultural products such as movies and series are increasingly consumed through on-demand streaming services, with Netflix being a major player in the global mediascape (Wayne, 2020). Thus, focusing specifically on Netflix's recommender system generates relevant, contemporary findings. With a streaming platform as widely used as Netflix's, many people are exposed to the recommender system implemented to assist its users in their viewing practices. With this wide exposure and visibility, it can be expected that the recommender has effects on its users, to a yet unknown extent. Especially considering the fact that when users open the Netflix app and log in to their account, they are immediately exposed to the recommender system consisting of rows with suggested movies and shows. So, the algorithm is not only an invisible, hidden, abstract thing, but it is something that influences the way people use Netflix from the moment they open the app. 
      This study will reveal the extent to which certain factors and the context of the recommender systems impact the usage of that specific recommender system. To achieve that, various factors are measured to investigate whether this affects Netflix users' intentions and actual behavior. The concepts included in this research are perceived source credibility, perceived personalization, attitude, behavioral intentions and the resulting behavior of recommendation adoption. These concepts will be thoroughly discussed in the next chapter. Looking into how users perceive algorithms is important, as these perceptions shape not only their orientation towards it, but also their actions (Bucher, 2017; Just & Latzer, 2017). People's intentions to use the recommender system and the resulting behavior of recommendation adoption impacts the recommender system's success and shows their ability to affect what is being consumed.
      Moreover, the findings can be useful for professionals in the field to further develop the functionality and visibility of algorithmic recommenders. According to Varela and Kaun (2019), users are considered "co-producers of content, contributing data and knowledge through their practices to the platform development and consequently to its success." (p. 198). By improving the functionalities of the recommender system with the findings and gained knowledge from this study, professionals can stand out from competitors, while also keeping users satisfied and subscribed by suggesting relevant movies and show to watch out of all the available options. The relevance of this thesis for streaming services such as Netflix is the evaluation of the credibility and personalization of algorithmic recommenders, as well as the attitudes toward it and the resulting intentions and behavior. With new knowledge on the influence of Netflix's recommendation algorithm in particular, the performance of current algorithms and recommender systems can be enhanced to improve the overall user experience and satisfaction in these times of information overloaded platforms. 

27 1.2. Scientific relevance
      Previous studies have investigated recommender systems, but in a broader sense rather than focusing on a specific recommender system (Shin, Zhong & Biocca, 2020). Researchers who did focus on Netflix's recommender system, took an industry perspective (Amatriain & Basilico, 2015; Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015). By using Netflix as a case study, the specific approach and techniques implemented by the company can be explored. However, this perspective does not allow for the expansion of understanding and knowledge on consumption and audience experiences. As stated by Turner (2019), research on consumer experiences and their everyday television viewing practices is limited. Also, as stated by Bucher (2017), there is limited research on "the ways in which people experience and perceive algorithms as part of their everyday life and media use" (p. 31). So, to fill this research gap, this study looks into user perceptions of and experiences with algorithms, and the role these factors play in their media use and consumption. The user-centered approach is especially useful to gain a better understanding of how people perceive and use algorithms, also considering the fact that companies that implement such systems are often reluctant to share data and statistics, making it even more interesting to gain insights on Netflix consumer behavior (Barr, 2015). Thus, by focusing on the users, more insight is gained into how Netflix's actual and current consumers perceive the system. As a result, it is revealed to what extent they intend to use it and their actual adoption of the recommendations. 
      Additionally, websites specifically designed to recommend movies have been thoroughly studied by researchers, but algorithmic recommendation systems from streaming services are relatively new in the research field (Bobadilla, Ortega, Hernando, & Alcalá, 2011). Results from studies that have focused on movie recommendation websites might not be particularly applicable to the context of recommender systems by streaming platforms. By focusing on the algorithmic recommenders from such platforms, another gap is filled and more insights can be gained on movie recommendations in another context. 
      Therefore, to fill the research gaps, the current study will take a user perspective by distributing an online survey among Netflix users to quantitatively investigate their preference for recommender types, perceived source credibility, perceived personalization, attitude, behavioral intentions and resulting behavior of recommendation adoption. Importantly, by addressing perceived personalization as a potential influential factor, this study fills the gap of limited research on perceived personalization. Perceived personalization is deemed a relevant concept to include in this study, as Netflix's recommendations are personalized and this measurement will indicate whether and to what extent users perceive it to be personalized. In turn, this personalization can have an impact on the effectiveness of the recommender systems and user satisfaction, which can affect behavioral intentions (Tintarev & Masthoff, 2012). 
      All things considered, by investigating the user perspective, specifically users' attitudes toward, perceptions of, intentions and behavior with this specific type of technology, this research contributes to the broader field of research on the social implications of algorithms and artificial intelligence and allows for a scientifical understanding of the current trends.

28 1.3. Chapter outline
      As discussed above, this thesis focuses on users' perceptions of Netflix's recommender system, and the effects thereof. This thesis is divided in five chapters and is structured as follows. After this chapter with the introduction of the topic of the thesis, its academic and societal relevance and the overall research question, Chapter 2 discusses previous research and theories on recommender systems and intentions. The theoretical background of this study is discussed together with the hypotheses that guide this study. Next, Chapter 3 explains the research design to provide more insights into the quantitative survey research method, the sampling method, the measurements used to test the hypotheses and answer the research question, and the data. Chapter 4 presents the results of the statistical analyses to test the hypotheses. In this section, it is clear whether the hypotheses can be confirmed or rejected. Lastly, Chapter 5 discusses the findings and concludes with an answer to the research question and the hypotheses. Theoretical and societal implications of the research findings are discussed, as well as the limitations of the study and suggestions for future research. 
























2. Theoretical framework

Before shedding light on the influence of Netflix's recommendation algorithm on subscription members, it is crucial to examine the environments in which this phenomenon takes place. This chapter reviews existing literature on the topic and builds a framework around the theoretical concepts that are applied to the current research. The theory is used to provide the reasoning for the research model and the hypotheses. Also, the relevance and usefulness of theoretical concepts are explored, as these concepts guide this chapter and serve as a backbone in the study. 

29 2.1. Recommender systems 
      With the rapid growth of internet services and media technologies, many of our actions and interactions take place online, such as buying online and gathering information through search engines (Lü et al., 2012). As people often rely on their peers for recommendations before trying something new or buying a product, recommender systems were developed to also offer help to people in their process of selecting a suitable product from all the options available (Sharma & Singh, 2016). This is especially relevant, as technological advancements and the online environments have led to an increase in the available choices for the consumer. The electronically stored data on what people choose, buy, and watch online creates opportunities for corporations to develop recommender systems. The recommender systems use this data on their users and preferences to predict what the users might like and be interested in in the future. 
      Recommender systems are especially popular in the entertainment industry (Kumar, Yadav, Singh, & Gupta, 2015). Due to the wide variety of available content that people can watch, recommender systems provide assistance to users through recommendations that have been found to match their interests, needs and preferences (Christensen & Schiaffino, 2011). A firm that has incorporated recommender systems as a major part of its services is the streaming platform Netflix. Netflix uses the content-based filtering algorithm to recommend items based on similarity with the users' previously preferred items (Bobadilla, Ortega, Hernando, & Alcalá, 2011). According to Sharma and Singh (2016), content-based systems revolve around users' past behavior, as products or items are recommended based on similarity with the ones the particular user has already liked in the past. So, when people finish a movie or show from any category on Netflix, the algorithm will recommend more titles from that particular category as it is likely that the user will like titles similar to movies and shows they just finished.  
      The use of recommender systems has proven to be beneficial and influential, as over 2/3rd of the movies people watch on Netflix were initially recommended by the algorithm (Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015; Kumar et al., 2015). However, it is important to note that how people experience algorithms is related to their perceptions, which then shapes intentions to use the recommender system and the adoption of algorithms (Shin, Zhong & Biocca, 2020). Therefore, the remainder of this chapter proposes hypotheses supported by theory and findings from previous studies to investigate the factors that influence people, and to what extent these factors influence users' decisions and actions in regard to the recommender system.

30 2.2. Different recommender types
      With the rise of big data, algorithms have become a new source of advice (Logg, Minson & Moore, 2019). As algorithms are able to make accurate predictions based on data, many studies have argued that they can perform better than human agents in various areas and contexts (Dietvorst, Simmons, & Massey, 2018; Logg, 2017). However, to what extent people accept and adopt the recommendations differs. In essence, people can have a preference for algorithmic recommender systems over human agents - algorithm appreciation -, whereas other people are more reluctant to follow recommendations by algorithms and prefer human recommendations - algorithm aversion. 

30.1 2.2.1. Algorithm appreciation and aversion
      Algorithm appreciation suggests that people prefer algorithms and are more likely to take advice from an algorithm than from a human being. In the context of news, Thurman, Moeller, Helberger, and Trilling (2019) found evidence for this appreciation for algorithmic recommendations. In the case of news selection, people showed higher levels of preference for recommendations from algorithms than from humans. Notably, the source of the data driving the recommendations has been found to influence the level of appreciation of algorithmic recommendations. When the past behavior of respondents' themselves served as a source for the algorithmic recommendations, more appreciation of algorithmic recommendations was shown than when the source was stated as being the past behavior of respondents' friends. In the case of Netflix, the recommender system and filtering technique is also based on the users' past behavior and they communicate this to the user through headings such as "because you watched...".
      Importantly, Castelo, Bos, and Lehmann (2019) state that people generally already know algorithms and its use for tasks such as recommending movies on streaming services. When people are already familiar with such an algorithm for the given task, they are more likely to trust the algorithm and more willing to rely on the algorithm for the task. As many online streaming services, such as Netflix and Hulu, use the same algorithmic recommendation system to recommend items based on the users' past behavior, it can be assumed that consumers are already familiar with this type of algorithm for the specific task. Therefore, they will be more likely to use the algorithm and have a favorable perception of or even preference for the system (Groshek & Krongard, 2016). 
      In contrast, algorithm aversion is the phenomenon that people prefer advice from humans over an algorithm's advice (Dietvorst, Simmons, & Massey, 2015). Despite algorithms outperforming human judgment, Logg, Minson, and Moore (2019) suggest that people can have a skeptical attitude toward relying on algorithms. Studies have shown that people prefer recommendations from humans (Dietvorst, Simmons & Massey, 2015; Sinha & Swearingen, 2001). The experiment conducted by Dietvorst, Simmons, and Massey (2015) showed that, in the context of predicting the future, people preferred human recommendations over those of algorithms. However, this preference was only present if they observed the algorithm making mistakes in its performance. When people did not see the algorithm inaccuracy and errors, or when the algorithmic predictions were nearly perfect, they were more likely to prefer the algorithm. Considering the context, the study focused on predicting the future, such as students' performances, and whether their prediction was correct.
      In comparison, in the case of Netflix's recommender system, there is no straightforward right or wrong answer. When Netflix recommends a movie, reasonable explanations are provided to help the user understand why that given title is recommended to them (Walek & Foijtik, 2020). This makes it less likely that the user will consider the recommendation to be an error. Also, by providing these explanations, Aggarwal (2016) states that it helps increase the credibility of the system and user loyalty. Thus, despite Dietvorst, Simmons, and Massey's (2015) findings on algorithm aversion, in the case of Netflix's recommender system, people might be less likely to observe the system making mistakes and will express preferences for an algorithm, and even consider the system to be more credible and become more loyal to it.
      Additionally, Sinha and Swearingen (2001) conducted an experiment in which they involved human and system recommendations. For the human recommendations, personal friends from participants were contacted to actually recommend items that could be included in the experiment. The findings suggested that participants preferred recommendations made by friends, showing the algorithm aversion. Yet, participants did express a high level of usefulness and overall satisfaction with the recommender systems. Significantly, a limitation in this study regards the bias in favor of the respondents' friends. The recommender source, and with that also the specific friend, was made visible to participants. It could have been the case that the participants would show more algorithmic appreciation when this bias and social desirability toward their friends was not present. 
      Also important to note is that although algorithmic recommendations were invented in the 1990s, they only became prominent and common in the past decade (Seaver, 2021). Since Sinha and Swearingen's (2001) study was conducted in 2001, algorithmic recommenders were less common and people's familiarity with using these systems was not as present. The unfamiliarity and rareness of such technologies could have potentially influenced their perceptions of or preference for algorithms. This makes it highly relevant to study algorithmic recommenders in a time when algorithms are more widespread, especially when it comes to streaming services. The shifting perceptions of algorithms contributes to the importance of investigating current perceptions and attitudes toward Netflix's recommendation algorithm and the relevance of the current study. 
      So, while this particular study by Sinha and Swearingen (2001), as well as Dietvorst, Simmons, and Massey (2015), found evidence for algorithmic aversion, the limitations such as bias and familiarity could have affected the results. By eliminating those limitations, the results could have directed toward algorithmic appreciation. As previously discussed, algorithmic appreciation regards the preference for algorithmic recommendations over human recommendations. If the study was conducted in an environment without possible bias toward any of the recommendation sources, the results could have been different, specifically, more toward algorithm appreciation. Thus, previous studies supporting algorithm aversion have to be critically reflected upon as people might not necessarily be averse toward recommendations by an algorithm, but they were affected by the context of the study. 
      As previous studies have shown, when people perceive recommender systems to be more useful than peer recommendations, they are more likely to accept the algorithmic recommendations (Sinha & Swearingen, 2001). In addition, the familiarity with a recommender system to find movies and shows to watch, as well as the source which the recommendations are based on - users' past behavior -, positively affects people's preference towards algorithmic recommendations (Groshek & Krongard, 2016; Thurman et al., 2019). Therefore, taking the approach of algorithm appreciation as introduced by Logg, Minson, and Moore (2019) and the findings from previous studies, it is hypothesized that people will be more likely to adopt recommendations by Netflix's algorithm than by their peers. 

H1: People will show higher levels of recommendation adoption for recommendations from Netflix's algorithm than from their friends and family 
31 
32 2.3. Theory of planned behavior
      Many social cognitive theories, such as Ajzen's (1991) theory of planned behavior (TPB), have argued that intention to perform a behavior can be looked at to predict actual performance of the behavior. Ajzen (1985) proposes that attitude - one's positive or negative individual perspective on the product - influences intentions, which in turn influences behavior. Behavioral intention is said to be the strongest predictor of actual behavior, as it indicates the probability of someone engaging in a certain behavior. To elaborate, Ajzen (1991) states that people's intention to perform a behavior is at the center of the theoretical model, with the rule that the stronger the intention, the more likely the performance. The intention is an indicator of someone's willingness to attempt or put in effort to perform the behavior. So, according to Ajzen (1991), attitude positively affects behavioral intentions, with the more favorable one's attitude, the stronger their behavioral intentions.  
      As previous studies have moreover shown, people's behavioral intentions could be predicted by looking at one's attitude. To illustrate, Korzaan (2003) and Ku and Tai (2013) found that, in the context of purchasing online, consumer purchase intention is primarily affected by consumer attitude. One's attitude showed a positive relationship with intentions to make purchases online. Similarly, a study which focused on determinants of intention to use Netflix, found that attitude toward Netflix is positively related to intention to use Netflix (Cebeci, Ince, & Turkcan, 2019). When people showed a favorable attitude toward Netflix, they were more likely to express intentions to use Netflix. 
      Taking Ajzen's TPB (1991) and findings from previous studies regarding the role of attitudes in determining intended behaviors, it can be expected that there is a positive relationship between attitudes toward Netflix's recommender system and intentions to use Netflix's recommender system. People who express a positive attitude will be likely to express a high level of behavioral intentions to use Netflix's recommender system. Therefore, it is hypothesized that attitude will positively predict behavioral intentions.
      
H2: People's attitude toward Netflix's recommender system will positively predict their behavioral intentions to use Netflix's recommender system

      Additionally, while intentions to engage in certain behaviors can be predicted by looking at attitudes, behavioral intentions can be looked at to predict people's action. Although not all intentions result in action, actions are controlled by intentions (Ajzen, 1985). The intention to perform or not perform a certain behavior, ultimately determines that action. As stated by Ajzen (1991), the general rule is that "the stronger the intention to engage in a behavior, the more likely should be its performance" (p. 181). 
      In line with Ajzen's (1991) statements, previous studies on shopping behavior have found a positive relationship between purchase intention and actual purchase behavior (e.g. De Cannière, De Pelsmacker, & Geuens, 2012; Kytö, Virtanen, & Mustonen, 2019). The study conducted by Kytö, Virtanen, and Mustonen (2019) found that purchase intention predicts purchase behavior, as people who expressed high levels of intentions to purchase a product, eventually also showed behaviors of actually purchasing the product. Similarly, De Cannière, De Pelsmacker, and Geuens (2012) found a significant impact of purchase intention on actual purchase behavior. 
      While these previous studies have looked at purchasing behaviors and intentions, it can be expected that similar processes are applicable in the context of following recommendations. However, in the case of streaming services, next to the monthly subscription fee, there is no monetary cost to watch a certain movie or show. Rather, there is a time investment, and time is lost when people watch something they do not like. So, as previously discussed, recommender systems are developed to help users find something to watch in the most effective way possible. In the current study, the action regard the user adopting Netflix recommendations, bridging a gap in literature by going beyond purchasing behavior and looking at watching behavior and intentions.  
      Ajzen's (1991) TPB is a relevant theoretical approach to explain people's behavior as it states that looking at one's behavioral intentions is an effective way to predict actual behavior. With the insights from this theory and previous studies, which found evidence for the relationship between behavioral intentions and actions, it can be expected that behavioral intentions will positively predict people's recommendation adoption. Therefore, it is also hypothesized that people with high levels of behavioral intentions will show higher levels of recommendation adoption than people who report lower levels of behavioral intentions. 

H3: People with high levels of behavioral intentions to use Netflix's recommender system will show higher levels of recommendation adoption 

33 2.4. Perceived source credibility
      As stated by Shin (2021), the recent growth and developments of algorithms have highlighted the importance of a trusted relationship between humans and artificial intelligence. Users will be more likely to accept and adopt a recommendation when they believe the algorithm's information to be credible. The degree to which a source is perceived to be believable, unbiased, or credible can influence people's attitudes and reactions toward the source's information (Hass, 1981). Hence, source credibility is an important and relevant concept to include in the current study on algorithms. Additionally, by looking into this concept, more light can be shed on the relationship between the source of the recommendation and factors that affect users' decision-making process, such as their attitudes and intentions. 
	A useful approach for this study is Hovland, Janis, and Kelley's (1953) proposed model of source credibility, which states that expertise and trustworthiness are the two important factors that constitute the concept of source credibility. Hovland, Janis, and Kelley (1953) define expertise as the extent to which a communicator is perceived to be a qualified source for discussing a subject and making valid statements. Trustworthiness can be defined as the degree to which the statements made by the source can be considered valid, approved and accepted. 
      As argued by Chaiken and Maheswaran (1994), when the source of the received information is perceived to be credible, it is likely that argument processing will result in persuasion. Similarly, when comparing highly credible sources and medium credible sources, the recommendation for buying a specific product was more effective when it was communicated by the highly credible source (Harmon & Coney, 1982). So, the more the source is perceived to be credible, the more likely the message is believed by the receivers (Grewal, Gotlieb, & Marmorstein, 1994). People's trust in the received information also plays a role in the process of drawing conclusions regarding their intentions. Previous studies on persuasion and cognition supported the claim that perceived source credibility plays an influential role when it comes to people's attitudes and behavioral intentions (Sternthal, Dholakia, & Leavitt, 1978; Wu & Shaffer, 1987). 
      Specifically, when a change in attitude or behavior is the goal, highly credible sources were found to be more influential than sources with low credibility (Hovland & Weiss, 1951). In the current study, Netflix's recommender system has the primary goal of wanting to affect users' behavior - that is, make them watch something that is both entertaining and relevant. When people see Netflix's recommender system as a source for recommendations to be credible, as opposed to recommender systems they do not perceive to be credible, the system can have more influence on its users and their attitudes and behavioral intentions. To elaborate, how people perceive recommender systems, particularly the expertise and trustworthiness of the system, can have an influence on the acceptance of recommendations by the algorithm (Luo, Luo, Schatzberg, & Sia, 2013). Additionally, previous studies, e,g. Ohanian (1990), have shown the importance of expertise and trustworthiness on people's degree of persuasion and acceptance of messages. 
      Moreover, Johnston and Warkentin (2012) found that perceived source credibility positively affected people's attitudes toward the recommendation. When a source is seen as credible, people's attitudes toward the recommender system are more favorable. Similarly, as stated by Kim, Kandampully, and Bilgihan (2018), the higher the level of source credibility, the more positive the attitude. In that case, it was also found that source credibility enhances attitudes toward both the message and the source of the message. Thus, building on these insights about the influential role of perceived source credibility, it can be assumed that the degree to which people perceive Netflix's algorithm as a source to be credible, can influence their attitude toward the recommender system. Therefore, it is hypothesized that there will be a positive relationship between source credibility and users' attitudes toward Netflix's recommender system.  
      
H4: Source credibility will be positively associated with people's attitudes toward Netflix's recommender system  

      As previously discussed, expertise and trustworthiness constitute source credibility. In previous studies on expertise, it has been found that endorsers' and salespersons' expertise plays a significant role in consumer purchase intentions (Tsai, Chin, & Chen, 2010; Wen, Tan, & Chang, 2009). The higher the perceived level of expertise, the more likely the intentions to purchase the recommended product. However, these studies have merely used a human source, whereas the current study will focus on an algorithmic source, allowing for another light to be shed on the phenomenon. 
      Furthermore, Saleem and Ellahi (2017) found that not only the relationship between expertise and purchase intention is significant, but also between trustworthiness and purchase intention. When the source is trusted, meaning that it shows high levels of sincerity and objectivity, the receiver can accept the message without having a reason to question the validity of the information provided. Consequentially, the information is considered more credible, which increases their intentions to use the source for further purposes. All in all, the perceived expertise and trustworthiness, the credibility, of a source are important factors for making a message more persuasive and to increase behavioral intentions. 
      Thus, to allow for a better understanding of people's intentions to use Netflix's recommender system and the eventual acceptance of Netflix's recommendations, it is crucial to assess the recommender and its perceived credibility. As stated by Mahapatra and Mishra (2017), investigating the extent to which people consider a recommender to be trustworthy and knowledgeable is important as these factors can influence people's acceptance of the recommendation. These findings can be linked to Ajzen's (1991) TPB, which states that credible perceptions toward the source, such as trust and expertise, lead to intention and then actual behavior. So, it can be assumed that perceived source credibility enhances users' behavioral intentions. Therefore, it is hypothesized that source credibility will have a positive impact on users' intentions to use Netflix's recommender system. 

H5: Source credibility will positively affect people's behavioral intentions to use Netflix's recommender system

34 2.5. Perceived personalization
      As firms all over the globe are using the web to reach their consumers while competition is growing every day, one of the strategies firms are adopting in order to retain and attract its consumers is personalized web content (Tam & Ho, 2006). With the use of recommender systems, firms do not only want to assist its consumers in making a choice by recommending products, but they also want each consumer to receive the right recommendation. As a result, the personalization technique is increasingly implemented to present individualized content to users (Greer & Murtaza, 2003). In fact, Netflix has implemented this technique and acknowledges the value of offering people personalized experiences; personalization is now at the core of the video streaming platform (Amatriain, 2013). According to Gomez-Uribe and Hunt (2015), Netflix's recommender system consists of various algorithms that work together to construct what people see on the homepage when they log in: rows with personalized recommendations, which are all different for each subscription member. As previously explained, Netflix uses a content-based system, meaning that the recommendations are based on users' past watching behavior (Bobadilla, Ortega, Hernando, & Alcalá, 2011; Sharma & Singh, 2016). 
      According to Noar, Harrington, and Aldrich (2009), this strategy of personalizing is effective because messages tailored to the individual are perceived to be more relevant, likeable and memorable. Thus, personalized messages often have a bigger impact on people and spark more behavioral change than non-personalized messages. Significantly, personalized advertising results in more positive consumer responses, such as improved attitude and intentions, because the receiver perceives personalized ads to be more relevant (De Keyzer, Dens, & De Pelsmacker, 2015). If the recommendation is not in line with the consumer's interests, the message will not be considered relevant and consumer responses will not improve or enhance. Netflix tries to eliminate this risk of users not being interested or perceiving it as irrelevant, by personalizing the recommendations and being transparent about it by labeling the rows on the homepage accordingly (Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015). For example, rows are named 'because you watched' followed by the name of a previously watched movie or show, and 'top picks for' followed by the name of the Netflix user.
      As said by Komiak and Benbasat (2006), personalized recommender systems generate relevant and better choices for that particular consumer, making it more likely that the consumer will believe that the system only looks at the user's preferences and not of any other party. This also contributes to users perceiving the system to be unbiased. Despite the firm's efforts to generate a personalized system, in order to be effective, users have to recognize and perceive the message as being personalized (De Keyzer, Dens, & De Pelsmacker, 2015). If people think the recommender system understands, knows, and considers their needs, they have recognized the message as being personalized. In essence, the extent to which people perceive recommender systems to understand and represent their personal needs is known as perceived personalization (Komiak & Benbasat, 2006). 
      Perceived personalization is an important concept to look at, as the effectiveness of a message can be superior when the recipient perceives it to be personalized, despite it actually being personalized or not (Li, 2016). Netflix's recommendations can be highly effective if users perceive it to be personalized, which in this case was the intention of Netflix's system. Importantly, these individualized recommendations can play a role in the way people interact with the recommendations they are presented, as well as their attitudes and intentions. Particularly, why one decides to accept a recommendation or not could be explained by looking at the extent to which they perceive the recommendation to be personalized. 
34.1 
34.2 2.5.1. Perceived personalization influencing attitudes and behavioral intentions
      Previous studies in various digital environments have already found evidence for personalization improving the effectiveness of a message, recommendation, or advertisement (Kalyanaraman & Sundar, 2006; Tam & Ho, 2006). In particular, perceived personalization has been found to significantly impact attitudes and behavioral intentions (Li, 2016; Xu, 2006). To illustrate, Li (2016) found that perceived personalization has a positive impact on both attitude and purchase intention. When people perceived the message to be personalized, they showed a more favorable attitude and higher levels of purchase intentions. Importantly, when it came to attitudes, Xu (2006) noted that perceived personalization does not only enhance favorable attitudes, but it also improves attitudes from people who initially did not have a favorable attitude. Taking these insights, it is hypothesized that the more Netflix's recommendations are perceived to be personalized, the more favorable the attitude toward the recommender system is. 
      
H6: Perceived personalization will positively affect attitudes toward Netflix's recommender system
      
      Additionally, Komiak and Benbasat (2006) found that perceived personalization has a significant impact on user intentions to adopt the recommendation. When people perceived the recommender system to have high levels of personalization, they expressed more intentions and willingness to rely on the system to make a decision. Similarly, as stated by Kim and Gambino (2016), positive perceptions of the given information and favorable attitudes formed by perceived personalization toward the whole site should result in greater intentions to revisit the site and make use of the recommender system. Thus, taking the claims and insights from previous studies, it can be assumed that when recommendations are perceived to be personalized, users are more likely to express desires to use the recommender system. Therefore, it is also hypothesized that perceived personalization will positively affect behavioral intentions toward Netflix's recommender system.  
      
H7: Perceived personalization will positively affect behavioral intentions to use Netflix's recommender system
      This approach is especially useful as previous studies focusing on algorithms have lacked in investigating the concept of perceived personalization and its influence on people's acceptance of recommendations (e.g. Weber, 2019). By exploring the concept of perceived personalization in the current research, more insights can be gained on the potential influence of personalization on people's responses to algorithmic recommendations and the connection with algorithm appreciation. 
      Moreover, studies on perceived personalization have often used a general and minimal personalization, for instance only based on gender (De Keyzer, Dens, & De Pelmacker, 2015; Li & Liu, 2017). Although this shows that even a minimal degree of personalization can already result in positive effects, considering that consumers indeed recognize the message to be personalized, looking into Netflix's more personalized recommender system will fill this gap of research on different levels of personalization. The incorporation of other aspects that can make the recommendation more personally relevant, such as tastes and preferences in the case of Netflix, is important since it likely that consumer responses are impacted by these aspects in different ways. 

35 2.6. Summary
      To sum up, the current study will investigate the key factors influencing behavioral intentions, and to what extent these intentions influence the adoption of the recommendations presented by Netflix to its users. This will expand the TPB model as proposed by Ajzen (1985), as well as the concepts of algorithm appreciation (Logg, Minson, & Moore, 2019) and algorithm aversion (Dietvorst, Simmons, & Massey, 2015). 
      As seen in the research model (see Figure 2.1.), it is first posed in H1 that recommender type will have a significant impact on recommendation adoption. People can have a preference toward either algorithms or human recommendations, but previous studies found a clear tendency toward algorithm appreciation, also considering the limitations of algorithm aversion studies. Thus, it is predicted that people will show higher levels of recommendation adoption for Netflix's recommendations, than for peers'. 
      Next, H4 proposes that source credibility has an effect on attitude, as the extent to which people perceive a recommender source to be trustworthy and knowledgeable can influence their perception of the algorithm. In turn, attitude affects behavioral intentions (H2), because a more favorable attitude toward Netflix's algorithmic recommendations is expected to positively affect behavioral intentions to use Netflix's recommender system. To test the mediation effect, H8a is proposed, which states that attitude will mediate the effect of source credibility on behavioral intentions. Source credibility is also predicted to positively effect behavioral intentions (H5). 
      Additionally, attitude will mediate the effect of perceived personalization on behavioral intentions, as proposed in H8b. It is predicted that perceived personalization will influence attitude (H6), which in turns affects behavioral intentions (H2). Perceived personalization is also expected to positively affect behavioral intentions (H7). 
      Finally, the TPB model (Ajzen, 1985) suggested that behavioral intention is a key determinant of actual behavior. Therefore, it is also expected that behavioral intentions will have a significant impact on recommendation adoption (H3). 
      All in all, this research model includes relevant and important concepts in order to answer the research question: "To what extent does Netflix's recommendation algorithm and its characteristics influence subscription members' behavioral intentions and recommendation adoption?". This study will generate more insights in and understanding of user experiences, intentions, and behavior regarding Netflix's recommender system. Moreover, by focusing on a contemporary topic such as Netflix's recommender system and investigating concepts such as perceived personalization with a user perspective, various gaps in academic literature will be filled. 

H8a: Attitude will mediate the effect of source credibility on behavioral intentions
H8b: Attitude will mediate the effect of perceived personalization on behavioral intentions










Figure 2.1. Model of hypotheses 1 - 7
36 3. Method
36.1 
This chapter discusses and justifies the methodological approach of the current study. Through this approach, the hypothesized model, as shown in the previous chapter, is tested. The first part of this chapter explains the quantitative approach of the research and the choice for a survey. This section is followed by the research design, which explains the survey structure, the conducted pretests and the sampling methods. Next, the participants section illustrates the sample through descriptive statistics. The chapter continues with an in-depth operationalization of all the variables included in the research design and mediation approach. Lastly, after the steps taken to ensure reliability and validity are reflected upon, the method of data analysis is explained.
36.2 
37 3.1. Choice of method
      This research aims to investigate users' perceptions toward Netflix's recommender system and the influence on behavioral intentions and the adoption of the recommendations. Specifically, behavioral intentions and recommender type are expected to influence recommendation adoption. Importantly, this study includes a mediated path, with perceived source credibility and perceived personalization affecting behavioral intentions through the mediated aspect of attitude. 
      By taking a quantitative approach, more insights can be gained on the influences of different concepts and explanations for the relations between concepts can be sought (Wrench, 2017). Through a deductive approach, the hypotheses derived from previous studies and theories, such as the theory of planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991) and concepts such as algorithm appreciation (Logg et al., 2019) and aversion (Dietvorst et al., 2015), as thoroughly discussed in the previous chapter. The formulated hypotheses can be tested through validated measurements, allowing for numerical data to be gathered for statistical analysis (Neuman, 2014). Furthermore, quantitative research is an appropriate method to explain phenomena with numerical data that are analyzed using statistics (Muijs, 2010). 
      As this research seeks a broader explanation, rather than an in-depth understanding of individual cases, quantitative research helps to understand effects and relations of the population of Netflix users (Golafshani, 2003). The results from the research can be used to draw conclusions about a wider population, supported by data. Through quantitative research, and survey research in particular, large amounts of data can be collected. As stated by Lawrence (2014), surveys can be used to ask many questions to measure many variables, and numerous hypotheses can be tested within one survey. Additionally, surveys are a systematic method for gathering information from a sample to describe a larger population using statistics (Groves et al., 2011). As qualitative research focuses on generating meanings from and interpreting specific cases of a phenomena, the aim is not to generate generalizability and objectivity (Slevitch, 2011). In contrast, quantitative research aims to measure the phenomenon under study and analyze the data for relationships and trends with the purpose of drawing conclusions on a larger population (Watson, 2015). By proposing hypotheses, testing, and verifying them, while also controlling for confounding factors that can influence outcomes, quantitative research helps to achieve objectivity and generalization - when the sample size is sufficient to ensure representativeness (Slevitch, 2011). 
      So, by using quantitative survey research, this study can investigate relationships between variables to describe the larger population of Netflix's subscription members (Punch, 2003). The online distribution and easy access to the survey contributes to this larger population, as participants can be reached on a global level and within a short time frame. And by allowing people from all ages above 18, different backgrounds, and educational levels to participate in the research, it is made possible to obtain a more diverse and robust sample that is representative of a large population. 
      However, some previous studies have argued that survey research is not the most suitable method for assessing causal effects. For instance, Mercer, Kreuter, Keeter, and Stuart (2017) stated that nonprobability surveys lack the aspect of random respondent selection, which is an essential condition for making unbiased inferences about population parameters and causal effects. Notably, by not including treatment conditions, where respondents are assigned to one of the conditions that reflect the independent variables in the study, internal causality arises as an issue. Since there are no comparison groups, groups do not differ in terms of their value on the independent variable due to treatment and non-treatment, and there is no random assignment of conditions. These aspects are strengths of experimental research, between-subjects designs in particular, to test causal hypotheses (Check & Schutt, 2011). 
      So, survey research might be less suitable to assess causality among the variables. Yet, there are strong reasons to believe that there might be causal relationships between various variables. For instance, as argued in Chapter 2, perceived source credibility and perceived personalization are expected to affect attitude, which in turn can affect behavioral intentions. By including a mediation model, a better understanding is gained of the process by which the independent variables affects the dependent variable. 
      All in all, a quantitative approach and an online survey is the most appropriate research method for this thesis to analyze attitude and its mediated aspect in this study, as well as other relations between the concepts among the target population of Netflix users, as displayed in the conceptual model (Figure 2.1.). 

38 3.2. Research design
      For this study, the survey software Qualtrics was used to create the questionnaire. In order to reach the target population, Netflix users, the distribution of the survey was online through various sampling methods. The questions participants were asked were based on statements as demonstrated in previous studies. These measurements were carefully chosen and adapted to fit the context of the current study - that is, Netflix's recommender system. The statements as used in the survey (Appendix A) are originally from studies by Pu and Chen (2010), Cheung, Luo, Sia, and Chen (2009), and Hyan Yoo and Gretzel (2008). 

38.1 3.2.1. Survey structure
      When respondents opened the survey distributed by the researcher, they were first provided an introduction to the research topic and a few ethical concerns. These ethical concerns were taken into account to protect respondents, guard their privacy, and to eventually present results that accurately reflect the respondents' answers and information (Oldendick, 2012). Respondents were asked for their consent and they were informed that they can withdraw from the study and skip questions without any consequences. Additionally, their data was used for the purpose of this study and was not shared with any other parties, and their answers were anonymous and cannot be traced back to them. 
      After consent was given, the survey continued with the filter questions. The participant requirements to be able to proceed with the survey included an age of 18 or higher and a current subscription to Netflix. Following the filter questions, respondents were asked questions about the streaming services they use, the length of their Netflix subscription, and their Netflix usage. Additionally, the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic were briefly touched upon through questions about their current use compared to before the pandemic, and their assessment of the quality of Netflix's recommendations since the pandemic. Their overall familiarity with Netflix's recommender system was also asked to make sure the sample is sufficiently familiar with the topic in question. For illustration purposes, a screenshot was taken from the researcher's own Netflix profile and arrows were added to emphasize the features of the recommender systems (see Q8 in Appendix A). 
      Next, the questions for the dependent variable were asked: attitude, behavioral intentions, and recommendation adoption. After these questions, the questions were asked for the independent variables: source credibility and perceived personalization. The last part of the survey contained questions regarding the respondents' demographic background. When the respondent finished the survey, a thank you message with contact information was presented. 

38.2 3.2.2. Survey pretests
      After the creation of the survey and before starting the actual data collection, six pretests were conducted to test the questionnaire. This small pretest sample consisted of three females and three males, recruited from the researcher's personal network. Conducting pretests does not only determine if respondents understand the formulated questions, but it also evaluates and increases the validity and reliability of the measurement (Pallant, 2016). Three participants of the pretests took the questionnaire while being on a phone call with the researcher, allowing for real-time feedback. The other three participants gave their feedback after taking the questionnaire by themselves. 
      A few small issues came forward and solutions were applied to the survey before officially distributing it. Firstly, while the participants expressed their familiarity with the recommender system, a brief explanation of the system was still preferred to make sure they were on the right track. So, the illustration in the survey was then accompanied by a short explanation of the system. Next, the item 'Netflix's recommender system takes my needs as its own preferences' from the perceived personalization measurement was found to be vague, which resulted in the adjustment of the item to 'Netflix's recommender system considers my needs'. Also, some participants were used to the order of answer options being 1 (strongly agree) to 5 or 7 (strongly disagree). As the answer options in this survey ranged from strongly disagree to strongly agree, the first question with these answer options stated in bold that respondents were asked to answer the questions based on a scale of 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The pretests were also useful to get an accurate estimation of the time it takes to fill in the survey, which confirmed the estimated duration as displayed by Qualtrics. 

38.3 3.2.3. Sampling method
      After the last adjustments were made, the final version of the survey (see Appendix A) was distributed through several sampling methods. In quantitative research, non-probability sampling methods are considered less appropriate due to subjectiveness in selecting the sample, making it not representative of the population (Etikan, Musa & Alkassim, 2016). However, it is deemed useful when random sampling is impossible, such as in this case where it is difficult to assemble a sample frame with a population as large as Netflix users within the time and costs constraints. To specify, in the current study, the population is defined as Netflix users above 18 years old. As the language of the survey was English, Netflix users who understand English were targeted. This limits the target audience of Netflix users to those who can speak English, filtering out people who do not understand English and could not fill out the survey. To recruit respondents for the survey, the nonrandom sampling methods purposive, snowball and volunteer sampling were used. The participants were recruited between the 14th and the 22nd of April. 
	Firstly, the survey was distributed on the social media platforms Facebook and Instagram. An appealing graphic was created for a Facebook post and an Instagram story (see Appendix B). On Facebook, the graphic was accompanied with a short textual explanation of the research. On Instagram, the story post directed people to the researcher's bio, which contained the link to the survey on Qualtrics. The story post reached 216 people in total, and combined with the Facebook post, five people shared the post with their own network.
      Additionally, purposive sampling was conducted. The survey was distributed on ten selected Reddit groups and forums, such as 'netflix'9 and 'SampleSize'10. These communities were found to be relevant and fitting to reach the target population. Despite the voluntary and non-individualized nature, with the choice to participate strongly relying on the respondents, by only posting it on highly relevant forums, people are more likely to participate as opposed to distributing it on random forums (Vehovar, Toepoel, & Steinmetz, 2016). It was also attempted to distribute the survey on three Facebook groups such as 'Netflix Recommendations'11, but the owners of the group did not approve. 
	An additional sampling method was SurveySwap. This platform reduces bias and makes a varied sample, as participants come from different countries, colleges, backgrounds, educational levels, and age groups. SurveySwap strictly keeps an eye on its users' behavior, for example by tracking respondents' completion time, and removes users that have shown to not take it seriously. This contributes to the reliability of the responses. In total, 69 responses, both valid and invalid, came from SurveySwap. 
	Finally, six social ties were asked to share the survey with people who meet the requirements and are unknown to the researcher.

39 3.3. Participants
      In total, 426 survey responses were recorded. Firstly, in the process of data cleaning, the pretests (n = 6) and previews (n = 2) were removed from the dataset. Next, participants who did not complete the survey were considered partial data, thus, these unusable responses were excluded (n = 90). Approximately ⅓ of these participants stopped at the questions regarding their number of years subscribed and hours spent on Netflix per day. Another ⅓ had stopped at the attitude questions, and the other ⅓ stopped at different moments in the survey. Additionally, six participants did not consent to participating in the survey and withdrew from the study. 
      Furthermore, people who did not meet the sampling criterion were removed from the dataset. Firstly, respondents who are younger than 18 were filtered out (n = 6) and those who answered 'no' to the question whether they are currently subscribed to Netflix were also removed (n = 15). Next, the median of the duration in seconds was calculated, which was 373. By taking 40% from 373 seconds, a duration of 149 seconds was established. Respondents with a completion time lower than 149 seconds were excluded from the dataset (n = 11). This ensures that the dataset does not include participants who speeded through the survey without thoroughly reading and answering the questions. Finally, the dataset was checked on straight lining, and this resulted in one participant being removed as they provided the same answer to each question. After data cleaning, the usable dataset is established at 289 participants. 
39.1.1 
39.2 3.3.1. Socio-demographic background
      In this study, age, gender, educational level, and country were part of the respondents' socio-demographic background. The age of the participants ranged from 18 to 76 years old (M = 27.43; SD = 1.34) with 63.7% females and 33.2% males. Regarding gender, four participants selected the option 'prefer not to say', and five participants selected 'other'. While two participants did not specify their gender in the provided text entry box, three participants were non-binary (n = 2) or agender (n = 1). In this study, the most named highest educational level was Bachelor's degree (48.1%), followed by high school graduate (14.9%), and Master's degree (13.5%). Due to the open nature of the study, meaning that there is no restriction or requirement in terms of nationality, the sample obtained a total of 25 different nationalities. The most prominent countries are the Netherlands (53.3%), United States of America (19.0%), and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (3.8%). 

39.3 3.3.2. Streaming services
      From a list of various streaming services, people were asked to select the services they are subscribed to. As the study required participants to be subscribed to Netflix, most of the participants had selected this platform (96.2%). Additionally, Disney+ (37.4%), Amazon Prime Video (33.9%), and Videoland (18.7%) were other popular streaming services among the participants. The answer option 'other' was provided with a text entry box in which respondents could name other streaming services not listed. 30 participants made use of this, which resulted in 18 additional streaming services with the most popular being Paramount+ (n = 4), Hayu (n = 3), and NLZIET (n = 2). 
	On average, people were subscribed to Netflix for 4.62 years (SD = 2.63) and spent 1.63 hours per day on watching Netflix (SD = 1.22). This average usage of 1.63 hours per day, 98 minutes, matches with statistics that show a daily use of 85 minutes per day (Statista, 2020). This indicates that the sample in this study matches the characteristics of the population, which reinforces the validity. When asked to compare current Netflix usage to Netflix usage before the pandemic, most participants assessed their Netflix usage to be about the same (37.7%), slightly higher (36.7%), or much higher (14.5%). As for the familiarity with Netflix's recommender system, most people expressed that they were very familiar (42.2%), extremely familiar (38.4%), or moderately familiar (14.2%). Additionally, compared to before the pandemic, most participants assessed the quality of Netflix's recommendations to be about the same (67.5%), somewhat better (18.7%), or somewhat worse (10.0%).  

Table 3.1. Descriptive statistics for single-item continuous variables age, years subscribed, and Netflix usage in hours per day, (N = 289)
VariablesMSDAge
Years subscribed
Netflix usage in hours per day27.43
4.62
1.631.43
2.63
1.22


Table 3.2. Frequencies for categorical variables gender, nationality, educational level, streaming platforms, Netflix usage comparison, familiarity, and recommendation quality
(N = 289)
VariablesItems%NGender




Educational level








Nationality












Streaming platforms
















Usage comparison





Familiarity





QualityWoman
Man
Other (non-binary, agender)
Prefer not to say

Bachelor's degree
High school graduate
Master's degree
Some college but no degree
Other (less than high school degree, associate degree in college, doctoral degree, professional degree)

The Netherlands
United States of America
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Other (Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Portugal, Romania, Russian Federation, Serbia, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, Viet Nam)

Netflix
Disney+
Amazon Prime Video
Videoland
HBO
Hulu
AppleTV+
ESPN+
Discovery+
Other (Acorn, Canal+, CBC Gem, Crave, Crunchyroll, Hayu, Hoichoi, NLZIET, NPO, Paramount+, Peacock, Rakuten Viki, SHOWTIME, Sky, Stan, STARZ, YouTube premium, Ziggo Sport)

Much higher
Slightly higher
About the same
Slightly lower
Much lower

Extremely familiar
Very familiar
Moderately familiar
Slightly familiar
Not familiar at all

Much better
Somewhat better
About the same
Somewhat worse
Much worse63.7%
33.2%
1.7%
1.4%

48.1%
14.9%
13.5%
12.8%
10.7%




53.3%
19.0%
3.8%

23.9%








96.2%
37.4%
33.9%
18.7%
12.5%
12.5%
7.6%
4.5%
2.4%
11.1%







14.5%
36.7%
37.7%
5.9%
5.2%

38.4%
42.2%
14.2%
4.5%
0.7%

3.1%
18.7%
67.5%
10.0%
0.7%184
96
5
4

139
43
39
37
31




154
55
11

69








278
108
98
54
36
36
22
13
7
30







42
106
109
17
15

111
122
41
13
2

9
54
195
29
2
40 3.4. Operationalization
      Whereas the previous chapter and the research model (Figure 2.1.) provided the theoretical foundation, this section establishes a way to make the theory under study measurable. The operationalization process, as explained by Neuman (2014), concerns the transformation of concepts into variables, and having concrete statements and survey questions to measure these variables. This section explains how the theoretical concepts as discussed in the previous chapter are operationalized for the online survey. Specifically, it is explained how the variables perceived personalization, source credibility, attitude, behavioral intentions, and recommendation adoption were measured. Finally, the control variables are also discussed.  

40.1 3.4.1. Attitude
      The attitude scale was taken from Pu and Chen (2010). Six items were included that measured users' overall feeling toward Netflix's recommender system (M = 3.31, SD = .76). By looking into users' satisfaction, it can be determined what users feel and think as they make use of the recommender system. Through the six items, users were able to express their preferences and opinions about the system. The questions were formulated on a 5-point scale that asked participants about their overall feelings toward the recommender system (1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree). Higher scores indicate more positive attitudes. 
      The item 'Netflix's recommender system made me confused about my choice' was negatively worded, thus it was reverse coded for further analyses. Through the reversed item, participants who did not pay attention to the questions can be identified (Neuman, 2014). Before performing the principal components analysis, the suitability of the data for factor analysis was assessed, and all assumptions regarding sample size, the ratio of participants to items, and the strength of the relationship among the items were met (Pallant, 2016). 
      The six Likert-scale based items were entered into factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Direct Oblimin rotation based on Eigenvalues (> 1.00), KMO = .86, χ2 (N = 289, 15) = 485.12, p <.001. The resultant model explained 53.8% of the variance in attitude. As expected, only one component was extracted with an Eigenvalue of >1, and the Scree plot clearly showed a bend at the second component. This was expected based on the original scale, established by Pu and Chen (2010), which also contains one component. The factor loadings of individual items onto the one factor found and the reliability score are presented in Table 3.3. Moreover, the reliability was tested for all items of the unidimensional scale. A Cronbach's α of .81 was revealed, indicating that the scale has good reliability. 
Table 3.3. Factor and reliability analyses for scale for attitude (N = 289)
ItemAttitudeOverall, I am satisfied with Netflix's recommender system
I am convinced of the quality of the movies and shows recommended to me
I am confident I will like the movies and shows recommended to me
Netflix's recommender system made me more confident in my decision on what to watch
The recommended movies and shows made me confused about deciding what to watch
Netflix's recommender system made me more confident in my decision on what to watch.85

.77

.82

.67

.50

.74R2
Cronbach's α
Eigenvalue53.8%
.81
3.23
40.2 
40.3 3.4.2. Behavioral intentions
      The behavioral intentions scale was taken from Pu and Chen (2010) to measure users' intention to use Netflix's recommender system, the continuance and frequency of this usage, willingness to recommend the system to friends, and their intention to watch the recommendations. Six items were included that measured user intention to use Netflix's recommender system (M = 3.26, SD = .87). Respondents were asked to answer the questions based on a 5-point scale (1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree). Higher scores indicate more intentions to use Netflix's recommender system to find something to watch. Before performing the principal components analysis, the suitability of the data for factor analysis was assessed, and all assumptions regarding sample size, the ratio of participants to items, and the strength of the relationship among the items were met (Pallant, 2016). 
      The six Likert-scale based items were entered into factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Direct Oblimin rotation based on Eigenvalues (> 1.00), KMO = .89, χ2 (N = 289, 15) = 1072.12, p <.001. The resultant model explained 66.4% of the variance in behavioral intentions. As expected, only one component was extracted with an Eigenvalue of >1, and the Scree plot clearly showed a bend at the second component. This was expected based on the original scale, established by Pu and Chen (2010), which also contains one component. The scale showed good reliability with a Cronbach's α of .89. The factor loadings of individual items onto the one factor found and the reliability score are presented in Table 3.4.
      
Table 3.4. Factor and reliability analyses for scale for behavioral intentions (N = 289)
ItemBehavioral intentionsI will use a recommender such as Netflix's to find movies and shows to watch
I will use Netflix's recommender system again
I will use Netflix's recommender system frequently
I prefer to use Netflix's recommender system in the future
I will watch the recommended movies and/or shows, given the opportunity
I will tell my friends about Netflix's recommender system.88

.88
.88
.87
.78

.56R2
Cronbach's α
Eigenvalue66.4%
.89
3.99
40.4 
40.5 3.4.3. Netflix recommendation adoption
      The recommendation adoption scale was taken from Cheung, Luo, Sia, and Chen (2009). It was adapted to the context of Netflix's recommendations. Five items were included that measured users' adoption of Netflix's recommendations (M = 4.42, SD = 1.32). The questions were formulated on a 7-point scale (1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree). Higher scores indicate higher levels of the adoption of Netflix's recommendations. Before performing the principal components analysis, the suitability of the data for factor analysis was assessed, and all assumptions regarding sample size, the ratio of participants to items, and the strength of the relationship among the items were met (Pallant, 2016). 
      The five Likert-scale based items were entered into factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Direct Oblimin rotation based on Eigenvalues (> 1.00), KMO = .85, χ2 (N = 289, 10) = 776.22, p <.001. The resultant model explained 66.1% of the variance in Netflix recommendation adoption. As expected, only one component was extracted with an Eigenvalue of >1, and the Scree plot clearly showed a bend at the second component. This was expected based on the original scale, established by Cheung, Luo, Sia, and Chen (2009), which also contains one component. The scale showed good reliability with a Cronbach's α of .87. The factor loadings of individual items onto the one factor found and the reliability score are presented in Table 3.5. 

Table 3.5. Factor and reliability analyses for scale for Netflix's recommendation adoption 
(N = 289)
ItemNetflix recommendation adoptionNetflix's recommendations...
... have enhanced my effectiveness in making decisions on what to watch
... made it easier for me to decide what to watch
... have motivated me to decide what to watch
The last time I looked at Netflix's recommendations I watched one of the recommended movies or shows
... contributed to my knowledge of presented movies and shows
.90

.88
.86
.78

.61R2
Cronbach's α
Eigenvalue66.4%
.87
3.30
40.6 
40.7 3.4.4. Peer recommendation adoption
      The recommendation adoption scale was taken from Cheung, Luo, Sia, and Chen (2009) and was adapted to the context of peer recommendations. Five items were included that measured people's adoption of peer recommendations (M = 5.30, SD = 1.32). Questions were formulated on a 7-point scale (1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree). Higher scores indicate higher levels of the adoption of recommendations by friends and family. Before performing the principal components analysis, the suitability of the data for factor analysis was assessed, and all assumptions regarding sample size, the ratio of participants to items, and the strength of the relationship among the items were met (Pallant, 2016). 
      The five Likert-scale based items were entered into factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Direct Oblimin rotation based on Eigenvalues (> 1.00), KMO = .89, χ2 (N = 289, 10) = 1212.96, p <.001. The resultant model explained 78.5% of the variance in peer recommendation adoption. As expected, only one component was extracted with an Eigenvalue of >1, and the Scree plot clearly showed a bend at the second component. This was expected based on the original scale, established by Cheung, Luo, Sia, and Chen (2009), which also contains one component. All items from the scale loaded onto one factor and showed excellent reliability with a Cronbach's α of .93. The factor loadings of individual items onto the one factor found and the reliability score are presented in Table 3.6. 
      
Table 3.6. Factor and reliability analyses for scale for peer recommendation adoption 
(N = 289)
ItemPeer recommendation adoptionMy friends' and family's recommendations...
... made it easier for me to decide what to watch
... have enhanced my effectiveness in making decisions on what to watch
... have motivated me to decide what to watch
The last time I received recommendations from friends and family, I watched one of the recommended movies or shows
... contributed to my knowledge of presented movies and shows
.88
.90

.86
.78

.61R2
Cronbach's α
Eigenvalue78.5%
.93
3.93
40.8 
40.9 3.4.5. Perceived source credibility
      The perceived source credibility scale was taken from Hyan Yoo and Gretzel (2008). The scale was adapted to fit the context of Netflix's recommender system. 16 items were included that measured people's credibility perceptions of Netflix's recommender system (M = 4.48, SD = .99). Questions were formulated on a 7-point scale that asked participants about the expertise and trustworthiness of Netflix's recommender system (1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree). Higher scores indicate higher levels of perceived credibility toward Netflix's recommender system. Before performing the principal components analysis, the suitability of the data for factor analysis was assessed, and all assumptions regarding sample size, the ratio of participants to items, and the strength of the relationship among the items were met (Pallant, 2016). 
      The 16 Likert-scale based items were entered into confirmative factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Direct Oblimin rotation based on Eigenvalues (> 1.00), KMO = .93, χ2 (N = 289, 120) = 2697.87, p <.001. The resultant model explained 64.1% of the variance in perceived source credibility. Three components had an Eigenvalue of >1, and the Scree plot showed a bend at the fourth component. However, for the purpose of this study, two components were extracted to match the original scale, which contained two subscales. 
      The items 'Netflix's recommender system is reliable' and 'Netflix's recommender system is dependable' loaded on the first factor, expertise, instead of on trustworthiness as originally established. The items 'Netflix's recommender system can be trusted' and 'Netflix's recommender system is there to help me' loaded on both factors, but they loaded stronger on trustworthiness. Additionally, the item 'Netflix's recommender system is consistent in the recommendations it provides' also loaded on both factors, but the difference was .01. As this difference was small, it was decided to assign the item to the same factor as the original scale - that is, trustworthiness. The items loaded onto two factors and showed good reliability with a Cronbach's α of .88 for the first factor, and a Cronbach's α of .87 for the second factor. The factor loadings of individual items onto the two factors extracted and the reliability scores are presented in Table 3.7. The factors found were: 
      Expertise. The first factor included eight items related to Netflix's recommender system's ability to provide valuable recommendations. 
      Trustworthiness. The second factor included eight items related to Netflix's recommender system's reliability and intentions. 

Table 3.7. Factor and reliability analyses for scale for perceived source credibility 
(N = 289)
ItemExpertiseTrustworthinessNetflix's recommender system...
... helps me find things I really like
... provides useful suggestions
... makes decisions easier
... is reliable
... is dependable 
... can provide me with more valuable recommendations than human beings
... has access to and can process more information than human beings
... offers suggestions that I might not have thought of
... is designed with the best intentions in mind
... is a good way to get suggestions from a neutral source
... is not biased
... wants me to find an option that best fits my needs
... is there to help me
... can be trusted
... is a good way to learn about different movies and shows
... is consistent in the recommendations it provides
.85
.81
.79
.79
.79
.65

.55

.44




.34
.39

.35










.82
.82
.80
.69
.58
.52
.35
.33R2
Cronbach's α
Eigenvalue48.3%
.88 
7.738.5%
.87
1.35
40.10 
40.11 3.4.6. Perceived personalization
      The perceived personalization scale was taken from Komiak and Benbasat (2006). It was adapted to the context of Netflix's recommender system to measure the extent to which users perceive the system's recommended movies and shows to be personalized. Three items were included that measured people's perceived personalization (M = 4.11, SD = 1.35). Questions were formulated on a 7-point scale that asked participants about Netflix's recommender system and to what extent they believe that the recommendations are based on their personal needs, interests and preferences (1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree). Higher scores indicate higher levels of perceived personalization. As previously explained, the item 'this recommender system takes my needs as its own preferences' was adjusted to 'Netflix's recommender system considers my needs' with the intention to make the essence of the statement clearer for the respondents. 
      Before performing the principal components analysis, the suitability of the data for factor analysis was assessed, and all assumptions regarding sample size, the ratio of participants to items, and the strength of the relationship among the items were met (Pallant, 2016). 
      The three Likert-scale based items were entered into factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Direct Oblimin rotation based on Eigenvalues (> 1.00), KMO = .69, χ2 (N = 289, 3) = 603.61, p <.001. The resultant model explained 82.7% of the variance in perceived personalization. As expected, all three items loaded onto one factor, which had an Eigenvalue of >1, and the Scree plot clearly showed a bend at the second component. This was expected because the original scale, established by Komiak and Benbasat (2006), contains one component. The scale showed good reliability with a Cronbach's α of .89. The factor loadings of individual items onto the one factor found and the reliability scores are presented in Table 3.8. 
      
Table 3.8. Factor and reliability analyses for scale for perceived personalization (N = 289)
ItemPerceived personalizationNetflix's recommender system...
... understands my needs
... knows what I want
... considers my needs
.95
.92
.85R2
Cronbach's α
Eigenvalue82.66%
.89
2.48
40.12 3.4.7. Control variables
      While aspects such as participants' socio-demographic background are not of primary interest in the current study, they can influence outcomes and need to be controlled for. The demographic variable age acts as a control variable in the mediation analysis to control for potential confounders. To illustrate, Dimmick, McCain, and Bolton (1979) stated that media use and age are significantly associated. More specifically, it has been found that perceptions of and attitudes toward technologies, as well as technology acceptance, tend to vary among ages (Arning & Ziefle, 2008; Assaker, 2020). So, as age can influence people's attitudes toward, perceptions of, and intentions with technologies, and with that also the outcomes of this study, the variable needs to be controlled for. 
	Additional variables that might affect the outcomes, are the respondents' familiarity with the recommender system and their Netflix usage. Previous studies found that familiarity with brands or products influences perceptions and purchase intentions (Park & Stoel, 2005; Shukla & Banerjee, 2014). Thus, it can be the case that in the current study, people who are more familiar with Netflix's recommender system might answer statements in the survey differently than people who are not familiar with the recommender system. Similarly, respondents' Netflix usage in hours per day can also influence their overall assessment of the recommender system. When Netflix is only used a few minutes per day, as opposed to a few hours per day, the user is less exposed to the recommender system and chances might be smaller that they regularly rely on the system to decide what to watch. 
	The control variables age, familiarity, and Netflix usage were entered as covariates in the mediation analysis (Hayes, 2017). 

41 3.5. Validity and reliability
      In the process of constructing the research design, various steps were taken to achieve, preserve, and improve the validity and reliability of this survey research. These steps will be explained in this section to provide insight into how measurement accuracy and internal consistency was ensured. 

41.1 3.5.1. Validity 
      Muijs (2004) defined validity as the extent to which the concept under study is measured accurately. To measure abstract concepts, instruments that indirectly measure these concepts have to be used, such as questionnaires. However, it is important to use the right measurement instrument that contains the right measures of the concept. Thus, the use of pre-established scales, scales that have been developed and tested in previous studies, ensures that the measurements are good indicators of the concepts. The scales all consisted of various items so respondents could provide answers to questions that yield the same definition. So, as stated by Hyman, Lamb, and Bulmer (2006), validity can be ensured by making use of existing scales that have been extensively tested.
	A factor analysis was conducted for each scale to help explore and confirm the relationships between the items of the scale (Knekta, Runyon, & Eddy, 2019). The total number of dimensions can also be identified through this statistical method. This way, content validity is ensured through factor analyses of all the scales included in the current study. The results of the factor analyses confirmed that the scales match with the original scales, except for the source credibility scale. Two items loaded on a different dimension, and three items loaded on both dimensions. The other scales matched the scales as tested by previous studies.
	Importantly, the internal validity of this study is enhanced by including control variables in the analyses (Behi & Nolan, 1996). Next to the independent and dependent variables, other variables that can have an impact on the outcomes should be controlled for. In this case, age, familiarity with Netflix's recommender system and Netflix usage were deemed relevant to include in the analyses and control for its potential influence. Thus, to limit the influence of confounding variables, and to potentially explain relationships found, they should be controlled for. This also helps in establishing causal relationships between the variables that were of interest in the hypotheses (Cahit, 2015). Variables that were not controlled for are alternative explanations for the results. 
      An additional potential factor that could influence outcomes is nationality. As explained by Gomez-Uribe and Hunt (2015), the Netflix video catalog differs per country, which affects the algorithm's recommendations for users from different countries. This could also affect people's perceptions and usage of the recommender system. However, this variable is not controlled for in the current study, but it is a suggestion for future studies, especially those conducting cross-national studies. 
      Lastly, as previously discussed, survey research is a less appropriate method for making unbiased inferences about casual effects. For instance, it is not the case that there was random assignment of participants, making the assessment of causality among the variables more difficult (Mercer, Kreuter, Keeter, & Stuart, 2017). More importantly, this study did not contain treatment conditions, where respondents are randomly assigned to one of these conditions that reflect the predictor variables in this study (Allen, 2017). Thus, all respondents were given the same questionnaire and were part of one group, rather than receiving different conditions and being part of an experimental or control group. In contrast, experimental research, studies with a between-subjects design in particular, are suitable to test causal hypotheses because they have comparison groups, the variation in the independent variable came before assessment of change in its dependent variable, and there is random assignment of the conditions (Check & Schutt, 2011). The lack of random assignment is an issue of internal validity, since relationships can be seen, such as a significant effect of perceived personalization on attitude, while it could actually be the case that attitude influences perceived personalization. 

41.2 3.5.2. Reliability 
      Reliability regards the accuracy of instruments, namely, the extent to which there is no measurement error (Muijs, 2004). The reliability of the current study is preserved by measuring theoretical concepts with existing scales that have proven to be reliable. Although the original scales have been slightly adapted to fit the context of the current study, reliability checks and factor analyses confirmed the reliability of each scale and verified the factors of the measurements. The reliability scores of the scales were established between .81 and .93. Therefore, this study has shown good and excellent reliability.
      Additionally, samples that were unusable were removed in the data cleaning process, reducing the risks of outliers, straight liners, and other unreliable responses impacting the accuracy of the scales. All in all, this study has proven to measure concepts accurately and consistently. 

42 3.6. Method of data analysis
	For the data analysis, the statistical software IBM SPSS Statistics 26 was used. Specifically, Hayes' (2017) PROCESS macro was used to conduct the mediation analyses. As stated by Hayes (2017), through the PROCESS modeling, hypotheses can be empirically tested to gain a better understanding of causal associations. Moreover, the analysis shows under which circumstances and conditions, how and when, X affects Y.
      Furthermore, all the regression analyses that have to be conducted to test the hypotheses as discussed in the previous chapter, can be done in one step. As a result, not only H8a and H8b can be tested with this mediation analysis, but also H2 - H7 can be tested within this analysis. After, the analysis provides an overview of all the direct, indirect, and conditional effects (Hayes, 2017). The bootstrap sample was set at 5000.
      PROCESS model 4 was used to test H2, H4, H5, H6, H7, H8a, and H8b. This model was carried out once with the independent variable being source credibility, and once with the independent variable being perceived personalization. Behavioral intentions was entered as the dependent variable, and attitude was the mediator. PROCESS model 6 was used to test H3. In this model, behavioral intentions acted as a second mediator, and Netflix recommendation adoption as the outcome variable. H1 was not included in the mediation analysis, but was tested through a paired-samples t-test. 




4. Results

This chapter focuses on the results of the statistical analyses conducted in IBM SPSS 26 in order to confirm or reject the hypotheses of this thesis. To test H2 - H8b, three mediation models using PROCESS model 4 and model 6 with 5000 bootstrap samples are conducted (Hayes, 2017). The first section reports the results of the paired-samples t-test to test the first hypothesis. This is followed by the first mediation model, which depicts the indirect and direct effect of source credibility on behavioral intentions, mediated by attitude. Next, the second mediation model is presented, with the indirect and direct effects of perceived personalization on behavioral intentions, mediated by attitude. All models include age, Netflix usage, and familiarity as covariates. The effects of these potential confounding factors are also explored. Lastly, after presenting the findings from each test, an overview with accepted and rejected hypotheses is presented. 

43 4.1. Multicollinearity check
      Before starting with the analyses, a check for multicollinearity was conducted. It is important to check the relationship among the independent variables, to avoid wider confidence intervals that result in less reliable estimated coefficients in the model (Alin, 2010; Pallant, 2016). All the variables were entered into a bivariate regression analysis to check how much the variables correlate with each other. In this case, only behavioral intentions and Netflix recommendation adoption had a high correlation of .83. However, since this relationship is what is hypothesized (see Figure 2.1.), other estimates are not impacted. Therefore, this correlation can be discarded and the study can continue with the statistical analyses. 

44 4.2. Netflix vs peer recommendation adoption 
      To test H1, a paired-samples t-test was conducted to evaluate the difference between respondents' adoption of recommendations by Netflix and by friends and family. There was a statistically significant difference between the adoption of Netflix recommendations (M = 4.43, SD = 1.31) and the adoption of recommendations by friends and family (M = 5.32, SD = 1.30), t(286) = -7.96, p < .001 (two-tailed). The mean increase in peer recommendation adoption was 0.88, 95% CI [-1.10; -.66]. The eta squared statistic (.29) indicated a large effect. As the peer recommendations have scored significantly higher than Netflix recommendations, H1 can be rejected. People do not show higher levels of recommendation adoption for recommendations from Netflix's algorithm than from their friends and family, but instead, the other way around. 

45 4.3. Mediation analysis of source credibility, attitude, and behavioral intentions
      To test H2, H4, H5, and H8a, Hayes' (2017) PROCESS model 4 was used to create the mediation model (see Figure 4.1.). The model was found to be significant, F(5, 229) = 75.58, p < .001, R2 = .62. 
      In step 1 of the mediation model, the regression of source credibility on behavioral intentions, ignoring the mediator, was significant and positive, b = .63, p = <.001. Step 2 showed that the regression of source credibility on the mediator, attitude, was also significant and positive, b = .61, t(230) = 17.91, p <.001. Step 3 of the mediation process showed that the mediator (attitude), controlling for source credibility, was significant and positive, b = .55, t(229) = 7.54, p = <.001. Step 4 of the analyses revealed that, controlling for the mediator (attitude), source credibility was a significant and positive predictor of behavioral intentions, b = .30, t(229) = 5.06, p = <.001. The indirect effect of X on Y was significantly greater than zero, with an effect of .34, 95% CI [.24; .44]. 
      This model shows that there are positive, significant associations between source credibility and attitudes, attitudes and behavioral intentions, and source credibility and behavioral intentions, with attitudes mediating the effect of source credibility on behavioral intentions. In other words, people who perceive Netflix's recommender system as a source to be credible, have a more positive attitude towards it, and these people with positive attitudes show higher levels of behavioral intentions to use the system. Additionally, those that perceive the system to be credible, also show higher levels of behavioral intentions to use the system. Thus, it is found that in this model, attitude mediates the effect of source credibility on behavioral intentions.
      Therefore, H2, H4, H5, and H8a can be accepted. The effects reported in this section are visualized in Figure 4.1. 
      
      
      
      
      





	





Notes: Age, familiarity and Netflix usage entered as covariates.
***p < .001.
Figure 4.1. Mediation model source credibility (PROCESS model 4)

46 4.4. Mediation analysis of perceived personalization, attitude, and behavioral intentions 
       To test H2, H6, H7, and H8b, Hayes' (2017) PROCESS model 4 was used to create the mediation model (see Figure 4.2.). The model was found to be significant, F(5, 232) = 74.13, p < .001, R2 = .62. 
      In step 1 of the mediation model, the regression of perceived personalization on behavioral intentions, ignoring the mediator, was significant and positive, b = .43, p = <.001. Step 2 showed that the regression of perceived personalization on the mediator, attitude, was also significant and positive, b = .40, t(233) = 14.60, p <.001. Step 3 of the mediation process showed that the mediator (attitude), controlling for perceived personalization, was significant and positive, b = .62, t(232) = 9.37, p = <.001. Step 4 of the analyses revealed that, controlling for the mediator (attitude), perceived personalization was a significant and positive predictor of behavioral intentions, b = .18, t(232) = 4.77, p = <.001. The indirect effect of X on Y was significantly greater than zero, with an effect of .25, 95% CI [.18; .31]. 
      This model shows that there are positive, significant associations between perceived personalization and attitudes, attitudes and behavioral intentions, and perceived personalization and behavioral intentions, with attitudes mediating the effect of perceived personalization on behavioral intentions. In other words, people who perceive Netflix's recommender system to be personalized, have a more positive attitude towards it, and these people with positive attitudes show higher levels of intentions to use the system. Additionally, those that perceive the system to be personalized, also show higher levels of behavioral intentions to use the system. Thus, it is found that in this model, attitude mediates the effect of perceived personalization on behavioral intentions. 
      Therefore, H2, H6, H7, and H8b can be accepted. The effects reported in this section are visualized in Figure 4.2.  









Notes: age, familiarity and Netflix usage entered as covariates.
***p < .001.
Figure 4.2. Mediation model perceived personalization (PROCESS model 4)

47 4.5. Behavioral intentions and recommendation adoption 
       Using PROCESS model 6 (Hayes, 2017), the variables behavioral intentions and recommendation adoption are included in the model to test H3 (see Figure 4.3.). The coefficients from previously tested hypotheses with model 4 can also be found in Figure 4.3., but are not further reported in this section because there were no meaningful differences between the models. 
       In this model, source credibility acted as the independent variable. The model was found to be significant, F(6, 228) = 111.84, p < .001, R2 = .75. The regression of behavioral intentions on Netflix recommendation adoption was significant and positive, b = .96, t(228) = 11.58, p <.001. 
       The model was also run with perceived personalization as the independent variable, to ensure the overall model is consistent. Likewise, the model was found to be significant, F(6, 230) = 103.60, p < .001, R2 = .73. It was found that in this model with perceived personalization, the regression of behavioral intentions on Netflix recommendation adoption is also significant and positive, b = 1.02, t(230) = 12.22, p < .001. 
       This shows that there is a positive, significant association between behavioral intentions and Netflix recommendation adoption. People who have higher intentions to use Netflix's recommender system show higher levels of adoption of Netflix's recommendations.
Therefore, H3 is confirmed and can be accepted. The effects reported in this section are visualized in Figure 4.3. 
   









Notes: Age, familiarity and Netflix usage entered as covariates.
***p < .001.
Figure 4.3. Mediation model recommendation adoption (PROCESS model 6)

48 4.6. The impact of age, Netflix usage, and familiarity
      As previously discussed (see §3.4.7.), age, familiarity, and Netflix usage might affect outcomes, so, they need to be controlled for. These variables were entered as covariates in each of the analyses. The control variable familiarity negatively predicts the dependent variable of the regression, in this case behavioral intentions, when source credibility acts as the predictor variable without controlling for the mediator (attitude) (b = -.16, t(230) = -3.34, p = .001). Familiarity also negatively predicts the dependent variable behavioral intentions, when perceived personalization is entered as the predictor variable without controlling for the mediator (attitude) (b = -.16, t(233) = -3.22, p = .002). 

49 4.7. Hypothesis testing
      Table 4.1. provides an overview of the confirmation of the hypotheses. Support was found for eight out of the nine posed hypotheses. There was no support for the first hypothesis, thus, it is rejected.  

Table 4.1. 
Confirmation of the Hypotheses
H #HypothesisSupportH1


H2

H3


H4

H5

H6

H7

H8a

H8bPeople will show higher levels of recommendation adoption for recommendations from Netflix's algorithm than from their friends and family 
People's attitude toward Netflix's recommender system will positively predict their behavioral intentions to use Netflix's recommender system
People with high levels of behavioral intentions to use Netflix's recommender system will show higher levels of recommendation adoption
Source credibility will be positively associated with people's attitudes toward Netflix's recommender system  
Source credibility will positively affect people's behavioral intentions to use Netflix's recommender system
Perceived personalization will positively affect attitudes toward Netflix's recommender system
Perceived personalization will positively affect behavioral intentions to use Netflix's recommender system
Attitude will mediate the effect of source credibility on behavioral intentions
Attitude will mediate the effect of perceived personalization on behavioral intentionsNo


Yes

Yes


Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes









5. Conclusion

The following chapter gives an overview of the findings of this research by providing a cohesive discussion and conclusion. The first section presents the results of this study, and discusses them through the practical and societal implications. Next, the limitations of this study are discussed, followed by suggestions for future research in this research area of streaming services' algorithms and their recommender systems. Finally, this chapter ends with a conclusion and an answer to the overall research question. 
49.1 
50 5.1. Discussion
      As seen in Table 4.1., support was found for eight out of the nine posed hypotheses. This section takes a closer look at the results and literature implications. The results of this study provide insights into Netflix users' intentions to use the recommender systems and their actual recommendation adoption by assessing their perceptions and attitudes. Specifically, it is evaluated to what extent users perceive the source to be credible and the recommendations to be personalized, as well as their attitudes toward the recommender system. 
      First of all, it was found that participants evaluated Netflix as a source to be credible, which positively correlated with their attitudes toward Netflix's recommender system. The more people perceive Netflix to be credible - trustworthy and knowledgeable -, the more positive their attitudes toward the system. This confirms Shin's (2021) statements on the importance of a trusted relationship between humans and technologies such as AI. Trusting the source of advice, and believing it is not only trustworthy but also knowledgeable, plays a significant role in generating positive attitudes. Additionally, source credibility was a significant indicator for behavioral intentions, confirming that people's acceptance of recommendations is related to their perception of the source in terms of trustworthiness and expertise (Mahapatra & Mishra, 2017). Developing a recommender system is one thing, but ensuring that the source is perceived to be trustworthy and knowledgeable is another important factor to generate favorable attitudes and eventually affect acceptance of the recommendations. This shows the importance of human factors, such as trust in the system, in determining the technology's success. Taking an audience perspective is also shown to be important, as the data generated from this perspective can be used to further develop and improve algorithms. 
      Similarly, Netflix's recommendations were perceived to be personalized by its users, which also positively correlated with attitudes. The more people perceive the recommender system and its recommendations to be personalized, the more positive their attitudes toward the system. Although previous studies already found evidence for personalization improving the effectiveness of a message, particularly when it regards attitudes and behavioral intentions, this finding is especially interesting, since this concept has been underexplored by studies in the research field of recommender systems (Li, 2016; Tam & Ho, 2006). To elaborate, this finding fills a gap by contributing to more insights into the role of personalization in streaming consumption, since web-based personalization has mainly only been studied in the contexts of e-commerce and social media marketing. When Netflix users perceive the algorithm's recommendations to be personalized to their needs and interests, they develop a more positive attitude and show more intentions to use the system to find something to watch. This shows the influential role of personalized recommendations by algorithmic recommenders on user attitudes and behavior in the streaming industry. 
      Additionally, while researchers (e.g. De Keyzer, Dens, & De Pelmacker, 2015) have focused on a general and minimal personalization, such as gender, this study shows that the elaborate and personalized recommender system from Netflix also impacts consumer responses. This is the first study which found evidence for the impact of perceived personalization on users in the context of video streaming, enhancing the importance of personalization as a possible explanation in various studies on algorithmic recommendations. These significant relations between perceived personalization and attitude, and source credibility and attitude also indicate that Netflix's attempts to be a credible source and provide personalized recommendations are successful, as it positively affects users' attitudes toward Netflix's recommender system.  
      In turn, attitude was found to be positively associated with behavioral intentions. The more positive one's attitude, the more intentions one has to use Netflix's recommender system. This is a particularly important finding, since the eventual goal of the developers of the recommender system is to help its users decide what to watch. Moreover, this finding is in line with the social cognitive theory of planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991). This theory proposes that attitude positively predicts behavioral intentions, which has been proven in this study. 
      Importantly, evidence was found for the mediating role of attitude. That is to say, attitude was found to mediate the effect that source credibility and perceived personalization have on behavioral intentions. In other words, attitude as a mediator explains the relationships between source credibility and behavioral intentions, as well as perceived personalization and behavioral intentions. These findings indicate something other studies have not explicitly found yet, namely that attitude acts as a mediator in these relationships, strengthening our understanding of the relations between the variables. This outcome indicates that it is highly beneficial for Netflix to improve the credibility of their system and continue to provide personalized recommendations, as it leads to positive attitudes, which in turn positively affects users' intention to make use of the system to find something to watch. If the relationships were found to be non-significant, it could mean that either Netflix's attempts to come across as a reliable source that provides personalized recommendations are not successful, or people's perceptions and attitudes are not as important in the process of relying on algorithms to find something to watch. However, the findings indicate the significance of user perceptions and attitudes for the success of recommender systems. 
      Next, intentions to use Netflix's recommender system was found to be positively associated with recommendation adoption. When people express intentions to use the recommender system to find something to watch, they are more likely to actually watch the recommended movies or shows. This finding supports Ajzen's (1991) theory of planned behavior, which proposed that behavioral intentions can be looked at to predict actual behavior. People with higher intentions to use Netflix's recommender system, are more likely to also report high levels of the adoption of recommendations by Netflix. This finding shows the importance of behavioral intentions, as this impacts users' eventual recommendation adoption. It also becomes clear that people do not only passively engage with recommender systems, but make conscious decisions by converting their intentions into behaviors. Users have plans to use the system and as a result, they decide to use the system and to adopt recommendations presented to them. 
      In addition, algorithm aversion and appreciation are assessed by looking into people's adoption of recommendations by Netflix and recommendations by friends and family. Although there were strong reasons to expect higher levels of recommendation adoption for recommendations by Netflix's system, this study supports findings from previous studies on algorithm aversion (e.g. Dietvorst, Simmons, & Massey, 2015; Sinha & Swearingen, 2015), in the context of video streaming. The assumption that people would show higher levels of recommendation adoption for recommendations from Netflix's algorithm than from their friends and family was not confirmed, as participants reported that they adopt more recommendations by friends and family, than recommendations by Netflix. Despite the findings showing overall favorable perceptions and attitudes toward Netflix's recommender system, this particular finding indicates a tendency toward algorithm aversion.
      The insights also support claims by Yeomans, Shah, Mullainathan, and Kleinberg (2019), who stated that the aversion toward algorithmic recommenders can be explained by looking at the subjective nature of contexts in which recommendations are made. The connection with personal tastes, moods, and emotions make entertainment related recommendations a subjective matter, and combined with a lack of understanding for how the algorithm operates, despite the algorithm's accuracy, people find it easier to understand the human recommendation process. Consequentially, people have more understanding for recommendations from a human and show aversion toward algorithms. Another explanation for this finding is the possible bias toward friends and the observed errors. Firstly, because this was not an experimental study, there were no actual recommendations from friends. As a result, respondents could have estimated their recommendation adoption with a particular and random friend or family member in mind. Sinha and Swearingen (2001) compared algorithmic and peer recommendations, and similarly stated that anonymized recommendations could prevent this bias. Thus, respondents in this study might have been biased, in favor of peers' recommendations. Secondly, it was argued in Chapter 2 (see §2.2.1.) that in this case, as opposed to the experiment conducted by Dietvorst, Simmons, and Massey (2015), there are no straightforward right or wrong recommendations, making it less likely that people observe an error and choose human recommenders over an algorithmic recommender. However, it can be the case that people consider certain features of the recommendation algorithm to generate errors. For instance, as stated by Gomez-Uribe and Hunt (2015), people use Netflix with different moods each time, making it necessary to recommend a diverse selection of movies and shows to accommodate each mood. Also, since it is common that one account is shared with multiple people, recommendations are also made diverse to offer something relevant to different users of the same account. With many rows of diverse content, it can be likely that there will be recommendations considered irrelevant and an error. In that case, the concept of serendipity might offer more insights into users' experiences with unexpected discoveries (Kotkov, Wang, & Veijalainen, 2016). 
      All in all, these findings demonstrate that users who show high levels of perceived source credibility and perceived personalization toward Netflix's recommender system, and therefore a more positive attitude, also show more intentions to use the system to find something to watch. Moreover, users with more intentions to use the system, are also more likely to actually watch something that was recommended by Netflix. However, when it comes to recommendations from friends and family, versus recommendations from Netflix, users are more likely to watch something recommended by their peers. 
51 5.2. Practical and societal implications
      This thesis looked into the influence of Netflix's recommender system on users' behavioral intentions and actual behavior. Specifically, the aim was to investigate the role of source credibility and perceived personalization, and attitude as a mediator in this phenomenon. It has been shown that users' attitudes and perceptions toward Netflix's recommender system in fact also correlate with their intentions to use the system and their actual behavior of adopting recommendations. However, it has been found that users have a preference for their friends' and family's recommendations. Overall, the findings of this study might be particularly interesting for Netflix and professionals in the streaming services industry to further develop and improve their recommender systems. To elaborate, this study shows the conditions under which users are likely to accept the recommendations provided by Netflix's recommender system - that is, when they perceive the source to be credible, the recommendations to be personalized, and have a positive attitude. Insights into these conditions are highly important and useful to professionals who develop and implement such recommender systems. 
      Furthermore, this thesis showed that the extent to which users perceive Netflix to be a credible source and the recommendations to be personalized, positively affects their attitudes. Streaming services, Netflix in particular, can highly benefit from the implementation of strategies which will specifically contribute to users' perceived source credibility and perceived personalization. For example, such strategies can include better communication toward the user, by being more transparent regarding the personalization of recommendations. Although Netflix already includes rows such as 'because you watched' followed by the title of a previously watched movie or show, more information could be provided to further explain why that particular title was recommended. Movies and shows on Netflix often include a percentage to represent the match, for instance, '80% match', but no further explanation is provided for this number. So, Netflix could be more transparent about which movies, shows, genres, or actors this number was based on to communicate the personalization to the user. This strategy can also increase credibility, by showing users that the recommendation algorithm is able to provide valuable recommendations, can be relied on to find something relevant, and has the best intentions in mind for the user. 
      By positively affecting these factors, users' attitudes will also be positively affected, which in turn will positively affect their intentions to use the recommender system to find something to watch. This is particularly interesting for streaming platforms, as this whole process will eventually also positively affect the actual behavior of recommendation adoption and watching what was recommended, which is the ultimate goal. 
      Also, in order to have an effective recommender system, it is crucial to consider the factors that can influence users' adoption of recommendations from a specific recommender system. So, the findings were contextualized by also looking into the differences in the adoption of recommendations from different recommender types - that is, peers and Netflix. The results showed that people prefer recommendations from friends and family over recommendations from Netflix, despite attitudes toward Netflix's recommender systems being positive. With the gained knowledge on the factors that affect consumer behavior, streaming platforms are able to not only work on these factors to further improve perceptions and attitudes, and with that also the actual use of the system, but in the long run it might also affect recommender type preferences in favor of Netflix. 
      All things considered, the findings provide professionals in the field with more insights on how users perceive such systems and how this influences the success of the algorithm. In particular, Netflix can benefit from these insights and improve its recommender system in order to strengthen their position in the industry and compete against other streaming services. To elaborate, this study shows the importance of personalized recommendations and the source's credibility in everyday experiences with algorithms. As these results can specifically be applied to Netflix's recommender system, it can be the case that competitors, such as Disney+, do not have similar or even lower levels of personalization, which could negatively affect the successes of the system. Furthermore, the findings of this research provide a framework with potential influential factors and contribute to the improvement and development of algorithmic recommenders. 
      
52 5.3. Limitations
      The research for this thesis was carefully prepared, designed and carried out. The hypotheses derived from theoretical concepts and previous studies, and as discussed in §3.5.1 and §3.5.2., the research design was carefully set up and carried out to ensure the validity and reliability of this study. However, as with any research, there are limitations regarding the choices that had to be made and the constraints of the study. The most significant limitations are discussed in this section. 
      First of all, while survey research has its benefits, it has been found to be a less suitable method to assess causality. Since there were no experimental and control groups, there is a lack of random assignment, resulting in an issue of internal validity. Relationships between variables were found, but because there were no conditions that reflect the predictor variables in this study, it is possible that the established relationships could in fact have been different. For example, relationships between source credibility and attitude, and perceived personalization and attitude have been found. While it was specifically found that perceived source credibility and perceived personalization impacted attitude, it could have been the case that attitude actually has an impact on those two factors instead. When people have a positive attitude toward Netflix's recommender system, they might have stronger and different perceptions regarding the source's credibility or the degree of personalization. However, the theoretical concepts and potential relationships in this study were thoroughly assessed. There were strong reasons to believe that there might have been causal relationships between the concepts in the current directions, which can be seen in the results. And by including a mediation model, the assessment of the relationships is strengthened. 
	Additionally, with more than half of the respondents being female, Dutch, and with an educational level of Bachelor's degree or higher, this study had a skewed sample. Thus, a limitation regards the generalizability of the results of this study. The aim is to be able to generalize the results to all Netflix users, but with this skewed sample, and therefore the bias, it could be argued that the results are only generalizable for highly educated Dutch female Netflix users. But, it has been found that overall, the sample is valid. For instance, the average for watching time found in this study matches the average watching time found in previous studies and available statistics. In addition to the selection process being well-designed, this study has proven validity and with that also the generalizability of the findings. 
      Another limitation regards the sampling method. Since the respondents were recruited through non-probability sampling and thus chose to participate, there might have been self-selection bias. Consequentially, the representativeness of the sample could have been negatively affected. For instance, people who decided to take part in this survey, might have been more motivated by their interest in Netflix and the recommender system than those who do not have favorable views on the platform. However, the descriptive statistics showed that the respondents from all levels of Netflix usage, years subscribed, familiarity, etc. took part in the study and responses to questions regarding perceptions and attitudes also ranged between all levels and answer options. Thus, while it can be said that although instead of non-probability sampling, probability sampling could have been beneficial to ensure generalizability, the sample in this study has shown that it is diverse, making the outcomes more generalizable to the population of Netflix users. 
      Moreover, for this survey research, self-reported measures were used to not only estimate people's Netflix usage in hours, but also to measure their recommendation adoption. For this study, the respondents' own generalizations and memories were relied on, and people might not always be aware of the influence of the algorithm on their behavior. Consequentially, they might inaccurately estimate and report their actual usage and behavior, resulting in skewed results. 
	Lastly, to measure source credibility, the validated scale for perceived source credibility was taken from Hyan Yoo and Gretzel (2008). Originally, the scale consisted of two subscales: expertise with seven items, and trustworthiness with nine items. However, a confirmatory factor analysis was carried out and the results showed that not all items loaded onto the same component as suggested in literature. Two items loaded on expertise instead of on trustworthiness, and three items loaded on both factors. This suggests that the items that loaded on different components might actually measure different constructs. Although, the items that loaded on both factors showed small differences between the factor loadings. Despite the differences with the original scale, good reliability was found for each of the components and the scale in its entirety. So, it can be concluded that the data is still reliable and conclusions can be drawn on a larger population. 

53 5.4. Suggestions for future research
	Next to taking into account the limitations discussed in the previous section and acting accordingly, this section presents additional suggestions for future research. Overall, the findings from this study can serve as a starting point to further explore this field of research. By implementing the following suggestions, the gained insights on the topic can be expanded to better understand and explain the phenomenon. 
      With the limitation of survey research to assess causality, it is suggested to conduct an experimental research. To better assess the causality of the concepts included in this study, a between-subjects study design with randomized and controlled experiments is suggested. For instance, the conditions can regard different degrees of perceived personalization to compare behavioral intentions. This way, self-reported measures do not have to be used, as actual behavior will be measured through the various conditions and the researcher is less dependent on the users' memories and generalizations. In addition, by bringing together the moment of data collection and the moment of media use, as opposed to asking respondents about the media use which took place before the study, the validity also improves (Naab, Karnowski, & Schlütz, 2019). All in all, it can be evaluated whether the independent variable manipulation was effective and caused the significant differences between groups (Allen, 2017). 
      Also, considering that catalogs among countries differ, people across countries could perceive and use Netflix's recommender system differently (Gomez-Uribe & Hunt, 2015). This study did not include nationality as a control variable, which leaves out the possibility that country might have affected the outcomes. Thus, it might be beneficial to control for nationality in addition to the control variables already included in this study. Additionally, to account for the bias and potential confounding influences in the sample as previously discussed, gender and educational level can also be controlled for by including it as a covariate in the analysis. For future research, this step might be less necessary if from the beginning, a more diverse sample is obtained to make the results more generalizable to the whole population of Netflix users. 
      Finally, it is recommended for future studies to expand the research by including other factors that could potentially affect the relationship between users' behavioral intentions and eventual recommendation adoption. According to Ajzen (1991), perceived behavioral control is the perception people have regarding the extent to which they believe the performance of the behavior to be easy or difficult. When two people express the same level of behavioral intentions, their confidence determines who is more likely to actually succeed in the performance of a given behavior. In other words, Netflix users might express the same level of intentions to use the system, but the users who are more confident in their abilities to use the system are more likely to actually adopt a recommendation than the users who have doubts. In this case, since a relationship between behavioral intentions and recommendation has already been found, perceived behavioral control could potentially act as a moderator. By looking into and including perceived behavioral control as a variable, specifically a moderator, this relationship can strengthen and more understanding and insights can be gained on the relationship between behavioral intentions and recommendation adoption.  

54 5.5. Conclusion
      With recommender systems becoming more prominent and essential in many industries, they have become a new field of research. The fast growth of Web 2.0 and technologies such as artificial intelligence have resulted in new challenges, possibilities and opportunities of such systems for not only researchers and professionals in the field, but also for its users. Therefore, to gain more insight into user behavior as a result of algorithmic recommender systems, this thesis aimed to investigate users' perceptions of and attitudes toward Netflix's recommender system, and the influence of these factors on behavioral intentions and recommendation adoption. The research question in this study was: 
      
      To what extent does Netflix's recommendation algorithm and its characteristics influence subscription members' behavioral intentions and recommendation adoption?

      To answer the research question, Netflix's recommendation algorithm influences its users in the sense that the extent to which they perceive the system to be credible and the recommendations to be personalized, affects their attitudes. In turn, their attitudes affect their intentions to use the system to find something to watch. As a result, the higher their intentions to use the system, the more likely they are to actually watch something that was recommended by Netflix. Netflix as a recommender type, however, is less effective in persuading people to watch a recommended movie or show than users' friends and family. 
      As far as is known, this thesis is the first study to examine perceptions, attitudes, and behavior from the users of Netflix, the biggest streaming platform to date. By conducting this study from a user perspective, a new field of research is explored and the research field of algorithmic recommenders in general is expanded. Building on the theory of planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991) and concepts such as algorithm appreciation (Logg, Minson, & Moore, 2019) and algorithm aversion (Dietvorst, Simmons, & Massey, 2015), this thesis showed significant relations between perceptions, attitudes, intentions, and behavior. In particular, the importance of perceived personalization for perceptions toward and use of recommender systems has been proven, filling research gaps and serving as a starting point for future studies on the further impacts of technologies such as artificial intelligence. 
      To conclude, this thesis and its gained insights serve as a starting point for future research to further look into not only people's perceptions of algorithms, but also the factors and contexts that play a role in the formation of these perceptions and the extent to which this eventually affects intentions and behavior. Researchers in the field of media and communication, as well as culture and society, are encouraged to continue exploring this topic and expanding knowledge on this evolving industry. With the results from this thesis, previous studies, and future studies in this field of research, we can deepen our understanding of the complex relationship between society and technologies and learn more about how they affect one another. 
      
55 References
Aggarwal, C. C. (2016). Recommender systems (Vol. 1). Cham: Springer International
      Publishing.
Ajzen, I. (1985). From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior. In Action control
       (pp. 11-39). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational behavior and human
      decision processes, 50(2), 179-211.
Alin, A. (2010). Multicollinearity. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational
      Statistics, 2(3), 370-374.
Allen, M. (Ed.). (2017). The SAGE encyclopedia of communication research methods. Sage
      Publications.
Amatriain, X. (2013, August). Big & personal: data and models behind netflix
recommendations. In Proceedings of the 2nd international workshop on big data, streams and heterogeneous source Mining: Algorithms, systems, programming models and applications (pp. 1-6).
Arning, K., & Ziefle, M. (2009, November). Different perspectives on technology acceptance:
The role of technology type and age. In Symposium of the Austrian HCI and usability engineering group (pp. 20-41). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Assaker, G. (2020). Age and gender differences in online travel reviews and user-generated
content (UGC) adoption: extending the technology acceptance model (TAM) with credibility theory. Journal of Hospitality Marketing & Management, 29(4), 428-449.
Barr, T. (2015). Whither netflix?. Journal of Telecommunications and the Digital
       Economy, 3(2), 12-26.
Beer, D. (2017). The social power of algorithms.
Behi, R., & Nolan, M. (1996). Causality and control: threats to internal validity. British
      Journal of Nursing, 5(6), 374-377.
Bobadilla, J., Ortega, F., Hernando, A., & Alcalá, J. (2011). Improving collaborative filtering
recommender system results and performance using genetic algorithms. Knowledge-based systems, 24(8), 1310-1316.
Bucher, T. (2017). The algorithmic imaginary: exploring the ordinary affects of Facebook
       algorithms. Information, communication & society, 20(1), 30-44.
Budzinski, O., Gaenssle, S., & Lindstädt, N. (2020). The Battle of YouTube, TV and Netflix
An Empirical Analysis of Competition in Audio-visual Media Markets. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3569553
Cahit, K. A. Y. A. (2015). Internal Validity: A Must in Research Designs. Educational
      Research and Reviews, 10(2), 111-118.
Castelo, N., Bos, M. W., & Lehmann, D. R. (2019). Task-dependent algorithm aversion.
      Journal of Marketing Research, 56(5), 809-825.
Cebeci, U., Ince, O., & Turkcan, H. (2019). Understanding the Intention to Use Netflix: An
Extended Technology Acceptance Model Approach. International Review of Management and Marketing, 9(6), 152-157.
Chaiken, S., & Maheswaran, D. (1994). Heuristic processing can bias systematic processing:
effects of source credibility, argument ambiguity, and task importance on attitude judgment. Journal of personality and social psychology, 66(3), 460.
Check, J., & Schutt, R. K. (2011). Research methods in education. Sage Publications.
Christensen, I. A., & Schiaffino, S. (2011). Entertainment recommender systems for group of
      users. Expert Systems with Applications, 38(11), 14127-14135.
Cook, S. (2021, May 18). 50+ Netflix statistics & facts that define the company's dominance
in 2021. Retrieved from https://www.comparitech.com/blog/vpn-privacy/netflix-statistics-facts-figures/
Crawford, J. (2015). Cutting the cord: An examination of changing TV viewership.
De Cannière, M. H., De Pelsmacker, P., & Geuens, M. (2010). Relationship quality and
purchase intention and behavior: The moderating impact of relationship strength. Journal of Business and Psychology, 25(1), 87-98.
De Keyzer, F., Dens, N., & De Pelsmacker, P. (2015). Is this for me? How Consumers
Respond to Personalized Advertising on Social Network Sites. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 15(2), 124-134. doi:10.1080/15252019.2015.1082450 
Dietvorst, B. J., Simmons, J. P., & Massey, C. (2015). Algorithm aversion: People
erroneously avoid algorithms after seeing them err. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 144(1), 114.
Dietvorst, B. J., Simmons, J. P., & Massey, C. (2018). Overcoming algorithm aversion:
People will use imperfect algorithms if they can (even slightly) modify them. Management Science, 64(3), 1155-1170.
Dimmick, J. W., McCain, T. A., & Bolton, W. T. (1979). Media use and the life span: Notes
      on theory and method. American behavioral scientist, 23(1), 7-31.
Etikan, I., Musa, S. A., & Alkassim, R. S. (2016). Comparison of convenience sampling and
      purposive sampling. American journal of theoretical and applied statistics, 5(1), 1-4.
Ettlinger, N. (2018). Algorithmic affordances for productive resistance. Big Data &
       Society, 5(1), 2053951718771399.
Golafshani, N. (2003). Understanding reliability and validity in qualitative research. The
      qualitative report, 8(4), 597-607.
Gomez-Uribe, C. A., & Hunt, N. (2015). The netflix recommender system: Algorithms,
business value, and innovation. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems (TMIS), 6(4), 1-19.
Greer, T. H., & Murtaza, M. B. (2003). Web personalization: The impact of perceived
innovation characteristics on the intention to use personalization. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 43(3), 50-55.
Grewal, D., Gotlieb, J., & Marmorstein, H. (1994). The moderating effects of message
framing and source credibility on the price-perceived risk relationship. Journal of consumer research, 21(1), 145-153.
Groshek, J., & Krongard, S. (2016). Netflix and engage? Implications for streaming television
on political participation during the 2016 US presidential campaign. Social Sciences, 5(4), 65.
Harmon, R. R., & Coney, K. A. (1982). The persuasive effects of source credibility in buy
      and lease situations. Journal of Marketing research, 19(2), 255-260.
Hass, R. G. (1981). Effects of source characteristics on cognitive responses in persuasion.
       Cognitive responses in persuasion, 141-172.
Hayes, A. F. (2017). Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process	analysis: A regression-based approach. Guilford publications.
Hovland, C. I., & Weiss, W. (1951). The influence of source credibility on communication
      effectiveness. Public opinion quarterly, 15(4), 635-650.
Hovland, C. I., Janis, I. L., & Kelley, H. H. (1953). Communication and persuasion. Yale
      University Press.
Hyman, L., Lamb, J., & Bulmer, M. (2006, April). The use of pre-existing survey questions:
Implications for data quality. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Quality in Survey Statistics (pp. 1-8). Wales, UK: Cardiff.
Jenner, M. (2018). Netflix and the Re-invention of Television. Springer.  
Johnston, A., & Warkentin, M. (2012). The influence of perceived source credibility on end
user attitudes and intentions to comply with recommended IT actions. In End-User Computing, Development, and Software Engineering: New Challenges (pp. 312-334). IGI Global.
Just, N., & Latzer, M. (2017). Governance by algorithms: reality construction by algorithmic
       selection on the Internet. Media, culture & society, 39(2), 238-258.
Kalyanaraman, S., & Sundar, S. S. (2006). The psychological appeal of personalized content
in web portals: Does customization affect attitudes and behavior?. Journal of Communication, 56(1), 110-132.
Kim, J., & Gambino, A. (2016). Do we trust the crowd or information system? Effects of
personalization and bandwagon cues on users' attitudes and behavioral intentions toward a restaurant recommendation website. Computers in Human Behavior, 65, 369-379.
Kim, S., Kandampully, J., & Bilgihan, A. (2018). The influence of eWOM communications:
An application of online social network framework. Computers in Human Behavior, 80, 243-254.
Knekta, E., Runyon, C., & Eddy, S. (2019). One size doesn't fit all: Using factor analysis to
gather validity evidence when using surveys in your research. CBE-Life Sciences Education, 18(1), rm1.
Komiak, S. Y., & Benbasat, I. (2006). The effects of personalization and familiarity on trust
      and adoption of recommendation agents. MIS quarterly, 941-960.
Konstan, J. A., & Riedl, J. (2012). Recommender systems: from algorithms to user
      experience. User modeling and user-adapted interaction, 22(1-2), 101-123.
Korzaan, M. L. (2003). Going with the flow: Predicting online purchase intentions. Journal of
      Computer Information Systems, 43(4), 25-31.
Kotkov, D., Wang, S., & Veijalainen, J. (2016). A survey of serendipity in recommender
       systems. Knowledge-Based Systems, 111, 180-192.
Ku, Y. C., & Tai, Y. M. (2013, January). What happens when recommendation system meets
reputation system? The impact of recommendation information on purchase intention. In 2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (pp. 1376-1383). IEEE.
Kumar, M., Yadav, D. K., Singh, A., & Gupta, V. K. (2015). A movie recommender system:
      Movrec. International Journal of Computer Applications, 124(3).
Kytö, E., Virtanen, M., & Mustonen, S. (2019). From intention to action: Predicting purchase
behavior with consumers' product expectations and perceptions, and their individual properties. Food quality and preference, 75, 1-9.
Lawrence, N. (2014). Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches.
Li, C. (2016). When does web-based personalization really work? The distinction between
actual personalization and perceived personalization. Computers in Human Behavior, 54, 25-33.
Li, C., & Liu, J. (2017). A name alone is not enough: A reexamination of web-based
      personalization effect. Computers in Human Behavior, 72, 132-139.
Lobato, R., & Lotz, A. D. (2020). Imagining global video: The challenge of Netflix. JCMS:
       Journal of Cinema and Media Studies, 59(3), 132-136.
Logg, J. M. (2017). Theory of machine: When do people rely on algorithms?. Harvard
      Business School working paper series# 17-086.
Logg, J. M., Minson, J. A., & Moore, D. A. (2019). Algorithm appreciation: People prefer
algorithmic to human judgment. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 151, 90-103.
Luo, C., Luo, X. R., Schatzberg, L., & Sia, C. L. (2013). Impact of informational factors on
online recommendation credibility: The moderating role of source credibility. Decision Support Systems, 56, 92-102.
Mahapatra, S., & Mishra, A. (2017). Acceptance and forwarding of electronic word of mouth.
Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 35(5), 594-610. https://doi.org/10.1108/MIP-01-2017-0007
Mercer, A. W., Kreuter, F., Keeter, S., & Stuart, E. A. (2017). Theory and practice in
nonprobability surveys: parallels between causal inference and survey inference. Public Opinion Quarterly, 81(S1), 250-271.
Montal, T., & Reich, Z. (2017). I, robot. You, journalist. Who is the author? Authorship,
bylines and full disclosure in automated journalism. Digital journalism, 5(7), 829-849.
Muijs, D. (2004). Validity, reliability and generalisability. Doing quantitative research in
      education with SPSS, 64-84.
Muijs, D. (2010). Doing quantitative research in education with SPSS. Sage.
Naab, T. K., Karnowski, V., & Schlütz, D. (2019). Reporting mobile social media use: how
survey and experience sampling measures differ. Communication Methods and Measures, 13(2), 126-147.
Netflix (2021). Q1'21 Shareholder Letter. Retreived from
       https://ir.netflix.net/financials/quarterly-earnings/default.aspx
Noar, S. M., Harrington, N. G., & Aldrich, R. S. (2009). The Role of Message Tailoring in the
Development of Persuasive Health Communication Messages. Annals of the International Communication Association, 33(1), 73-133. doi:10.1080/23808985.2009.11679085 
Ohanian, R. (1990). Construction and validation of a scale to measure celebrity endorsers'
perceived expertise, trustworthiness, and attractiveness. Journal of advertising, 19(3), 39-52.
Oldendick, R. W. (2012). Survey research ethics. In Handbook of survey methodology for the
      social sciences (pp. 23-35). Springer, New York, NY.
Pallant, J. (2016). SPSS Survival Guide Manual 6th edition. Two Penn Plaza.
Park, J., & Stoel, L. (2005). Effect of brand familiarity, experience and information on online
      apparel purchase. International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management.
Pazzani, M. J., & Billsus, D. (2007). Content-based recommendation systems. In The adaptive
      web (pp. 325-341). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Pittman, M., & Sheehan, K. (2015). Sprinting a media marathon: Uses and gratifications of
      binge-watching television through Netflix. First Monday.
Punch, K. F. (2003). Survey research: The basics. Sage.
Quarterly number of Netflix subscribers in the Netherlands from the 2nd quarter of 2014 to
the 4th quarter of 2019. (2020, January). Statista. https://www.statista.com/statistics/660920/number-of-netflix-subscribers-in-the-netherlands/
Rataul, P., Tisch, D., & Zamborsky, P. (2018). Netflix: Dynamic capabilities for global
       success. SAGE Publications: SAGE Business Cases Originals.
Reddy, S. R. S., Nalluri, S., Kunisetti, S., Ashok, S., & Venkatesh, B. (2019). Content-based
movie recommendation system using genre correlation. In Smart Intelligent Computing and Applications (pp. 391-397). Springer, Singapore.
Saleem, A., & Ellahi, A. (2017). Influence of electronic word of mouth on purchase intention
of fashion products in social networking websites. Pakistan Journal of Commerce and Social Sciences (PJCSS), 11(2), 597-622.
Seaver, N. (2021). Seeing like an infrastructure: avidity and difference in algorithmic
      recommendation. Cultural Studies, 1-21.
Sharma, R., & Singh, R. (2016). Evolution of recommender systems from ancient times to
      modern era: a survey. Indian Journal of Science and Technology, 9(20), 1-12.
Shin, D., Zhong, B., & Biocca, F. A. (2020). Beyond user experience: What constitutes
algorithmic experiences?. International Journal of Information Management, 52, 102061.
Shin, D. (2021). How do people judge the credibility of algorithmic sources?. AI & SOCIETY,
      1-16.
Shukla, P., & Banerjee, M. (2014). The direct and interactive effects of store‐level promotions
on impulse purchase: Moderating impact of category familiarity and normative influences. Journal of Consumer Behaviour, 13(4), 242-250.
Sinha, R. R., & Swearingen, K. (2001). Comparing recommendations made by online
       systems and friends. DELOS, 106.
Slevitch, L. (2011). Qualitative and quantitative methodologies compared: Ontological and
epistemological perspectives. Journal of Quality Assurance in Hospitality & Tourism, 12(1), 73-81.
Sternthal, B., Dholakia, R., & Leavitt, C. (1978). The Persuasive Effect of Source Credibility:
Tests of Cognitive Response. Journal of Consumer Research, 4(4), 252. doi:10.1086/208704 
Tam, K. Y., & Ho, S. Y. (2006). Understanding the impact of web personalization on user
      information processing and decision outcomes. MIS quarterly, 865-890.
Thurman, N., Moeller, J., Helberger, N., & Trilling, D. (2019). My friends, editors,
algorithms, and I: Examining audience attitudes to news selection. Digital Journalism, 7(4), 447-469.
Tintarev, N., & Masthoff, J. (2012). Evaluating the effectiveness of explanations for
recommender systems. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, 22(4-5), 399-439.
Tsai, M. T., Chin, C. W., & Chen, C. C. (2010). The effect of trust belief and salesperson's
expertise on consumer's intention to purchase nutraceuticals: Applying the theory of reasoned action. Social Behavior and Personality: an international journal, 38(2), 273-287.
Turner, G. (2019). Approaching the cultures of use: Netflix, disruption and the
       audience. Critical Studies in Television, 14(2), 222-232.
Varela, D., & Kaun, A. (2019). The Netflix Experience: A User-Focused Approach to the
       Netflix Recommendation Algorithm.
Vehovar, V., Toepoel, V., & Steinmetz, S. (2016). Non-probability sampling. The Sage
       handbook of survey methods, 329-345.
Walek, B., & Fojtik, V. (2020). A hybrid recommender system for recommending relevant
      movies using an expert system. Expert Systems with Applications, 158, 113452.
Watson, R. (2015). Quantitative research. Nursing Standard (2014+), 29(31), 44.
Wayne, M. L. (2020). Global streaming platforms and national pay-television markets: a case
study of Netflix and multi-channel providers in Israel. The Communication Review, 23(1), 29-45.
Wrench, J. S. (2017). Quantitative methodology. The international encyclopedia of
      communication research methods, 1-10.
Weber, I. (2019, June 24). What makes people accept recommendations? A comparison of
different recommender types on music streaming platforms. Media, Culture & Society. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/2105/50092
Wen, C., Tan, B. C., & Chang, K. T. T. (2009). Advertising effectiveness on social network
sites: an investigation of tie strength, endorser expertise and product type on consumer purchase intention. ICIS 2009 Proceedings, 151.
Willson, M. (2017). Algorithms (and the) everyday. Information, Communication &
       Society, 20(1), 137-150.
Wu, C., & Shaffer, D. R. (1987). Susceptibility to persuasive appeals as a function of source
credibility and prior experience with the attitude object. Journal of personality and social psychology, 52(4), 677.
Xu, D. J. (2006). The influence of personalization in affecting consumer attitudes toward
       mobile advertising in China. Journal of computer information systems, 47(2), 9-19.
















56 Appendix A. Survey questions


Welcome,

Thank you for your participation in this survey. Your input is highly appreciated and valuable! 

I am a Media & Creative Industries student at the Erasmus University Rotterdam. This survey is part of my Master's thesis research regarding Netflix's recommendation algorithm. For the purpose of this research, you have to be 18 years or older and subscribed to Netflix to participate. This survey will take approximately 5-10 minutes to complete. All the collected data will only be used for the purpose of this study, and will not be shared with third parties. Your participation in the survey is entirely anonymous and voluntary. There are no right or wrong answers, your honest assessment is what I am interested in. Please read the instructions provided carefully and fill out the survey in its entirety. If you wish to stop the survey at any point, you can do so. If you have any remaining questions do not hesitate to contact me via: 465192nn@eur.nl. Thank you very much for your time! 

Q1 Please select one of the following: 
o I consent to taking part in this research and confirm I agree to each of the statements      
above 
o I withdraw from participating in this research. 


Q2 How old are you?

▼ Younger than 18 ... 99


Q3 Are you currently subscribed to Netflix?
o Yes 
o No 

Q4 Which streaming services are you subscribed to?
▢ Amazon Prime Video
▢ AppleTV+
▢ Discovery+ 
▢ Disney+
▢ ESPN+ 
▢ HBO
▢ Hulu
▢ Netflix
▢ Videoland
▢ Other:  ________________________________________________

Q5 How many years have you been subscribed to Netflix? (e.g. 1.5, 4, etc.)
________________________________________________________________


Q6 On average, how many hours per day do you use Netflix? (e.g. 0.5, 4, etc.)
________________________________________________________________

Q7 Please think about your Netflix usage before the pandemic and your current Netflix usage. Compared to before the pandemic, my current Netflix use is...
o Much higher
o Slightly higher
o About the same
o Slightly lower
o Much lower


Q8 Netflix has a wide catalog with movies and shows you can watch. When you log in, you see various rows with different types of content recommended to you. To what extent are you familiar with Netflix's recommender system as just explained and seen in the picture below? 









o Extremely familiar
o Very familiar
o Moderately familiar
o Slightly familiar
o Not familiar at all

Q9 Since the COVID-19 pandemic started, how would you assess the quality of Netflix's 
recommendations? 

o Much better
o Somewhat better
o About the same
o Somewhat worse
o Much worse


Q10 Please indicate your overall feeling toward Netflix's recommender system on a scale of strongly disagree to strongly agree.
Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)Overall, I am satisfied with Netflix's recommender system (1) o o o o o I am convinced of the quality of the movies and shows recommended to me (2) o o o o o I am confident I will like the movies and shows recommended to me (3) o o o o o Netflix's recommender system made me more confident in my decision on what to watch (4) o o o o o The recommended movies and shows made me confused about deciding what to watch (5) o o o o o Netflix's recommender system can be trusted (6) o o o o o Q11 To what extent do you agree with the following statements regarding using Netflix's recommender system?
Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)I will use a recommender such as Netflix's to find movies and shows to watch (1) o o o o o I will use Netflix's recommender system again (2) o o o o o I will use Netflix's recommender system frequently (3) o o o o o I prefer to use Netflix's recommender system in the future (4) o o o o o I will tell my friends about Netflix's recommender system (5) o o o o o I will watch the recommended movies and/or shows, given the opportunity (6) o o o o o 
Q12 Please indicate to what extent Netflix's recommendations have an impact on you.
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)Netflix's recommendations made it easier for me to decide what to watch (1) o o o o o o o Netflix's recommendations have enhanced my effectiveness in making decisions on what to watch (2) o o o o o o o Netflix's recommendations have motivated me to decide what to watch (3) o o o o o o o The last time I looked at Netflix's recommendations I watched one of the recommended movies or shows (4) o o o o o o o Netflix's recommendations contributed to my knowledge of presented movies and shows (5) o o o o o o o 






Q13 Not only algorithms such as Netflix's system provide you with recommendations, but also the people around you. To what extent do the recommendations by your friends and family affect you?
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)My friends' and family's recommendations made it easier for me to decide what to watch (1) o o o o o o o My friends' and family's  recommendations have enhanced my effectiveness in making decisions on what to watch (2) o o o o o o o My friends' and family's recommendations have motivated me to decide what to watch (3) o o o o o o o The last time I received recommendations from friends and family, I watched one of the recommended movies or shows (4) o o o o o o o My friends' and family's  recommendations contributed to my knowledge of presented movies and/or shows (5) o o o o o o o 
Q14 Now, I would like to know your general opinion on Netflix's recommendations. 

Netflix's recommender system...
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)provides useful suggestions (1) o o o o o o o makes decisions easier (2) o o o o o o o is a good way to learn about different movies and shows (3) o o o o o o o offers suggestions that I might not have thought of (4) o o o o o o o has access to and can process more information than human beings (5) o o o o o o o helps me find things I really like (6) o o o o o o o 







Q15 Netflix's recommender system...
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)can provide me with more valuable recommendations than human beings (1) o o o o o o o is reliable (2) o o o o o o o is dependable (3) o o o o o o o is designed with the best intentions in mind (4) o o o o o o o can be trusted (5) o o o o o o o 

Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)is not biased (6) o o o o o o o wants me to find an option that best fits my needs (7) o o o o o o o is a good way to get suggestions from a neutral source (8) o o o o o o o is consistent in the recommendations it provides (9) o o o o o o o is there to help me (10) o o o o o o o 

Q16 Netflix's recommender system...
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)understands my needs (1) o o o o o o o knows what I want (2) o o o o o o o considers my needs (3) o o o o o o o 

Q17 Finally, I would like to ask you some questions about your background. In which country do you currently reside?

▼ Afghanistan  ... Zimbabwe


Q18 What gender identity best describes you currently?
o Man 
o Woman 
o Prefer not to say 
o Other  ________________________________________________


Q19 What is the highest level of school you have completed or the highest degree you have received? 
o Less than high school degree 
o High school graduate 
o Some college but no degree 
o Associate degree in college 
o Bachelor's degree 
o Master's degree 
o Doctoral degree 
o Professional degree 

Thank you so much for filling in my survey, I really appreciate it! If you have any further questions, comments or complaints, please do not hesitate to get in touch with me (465192nn@eur.nl) or my supervisor, Dr. João Ferreira Goncalves (ferreiragoncalves@eshcc.eur.nl). You can close this window now.
Best regards, Nhu Anh Nguyen.



















Appendix B. Social media advertisement (Instagram Story & Facebook post) 











Fake News and the Polarized Indian

Studying the relationship between political attitudes and engagement with disinformation



	


Student Name:	Shannon Mathew
Student Number:	482427sm

Supervisor: 		Dr. Joao Ferreira Goncalves


Master Media Studies - Media, Culture & Society
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication
Erasmus University Rotterdam


Master's Thesis 
June 2019



Fake News and the Polarized Indian
Studying the relationship between political attitudes and engagement with disinformation
 



ABSTRACT

India is experiencing a disinformation epidemic that is permeating the fabric of the country and polarizing the public, whether people are aware of it or not. Though extensive coverage is being given to this 'fake news crisis' in media discourse, the focus is often on the technologies that have enabled its fast proliferation rather than the socio-political atmosphere that encourages it and even less on the ordinary public that unwittingly distributes it. Through an experimental research, this study delves into how individuals engage with political (dis)information and the role that personal political attitudes play in that process. Research is conducted through an online within-subjects experimental survey in the run up to the 2019 Indian General Elections, focusing on the subset of the Indian population that are internet users and consumers of English language news. The collected data revealed that holding left or right-leaning attitudes influences the way in which attitude affirming or discrepant political information is engaged with. Guided by a greater need to avoid cognitive dissonance and achieve confirmation bias that impacts critical information processing filters, right-leaning individuals are more susceptible to believing disinformation when it aligns with their views than left-leaning counterparts. Growing polarisation of socio-political identities has also been identified as a factor, especially in the distinction between the consolidated right-identity versus the left-identity that is more loosely connected and more defined in their opposition to the right. These results need to be viewed in the context of the growing power of the BJP and the mass appeal of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who has become central to the socio-political imagining of the country. The results of this quantitative study compliment the findings of previous qualitative research, which highlight the alignment of the rise of BJP and Modi with the surge in nationalism-fuelled disinformation distribution.

KEYWORDS: disinformation, confirmation bias, polarization, political attitudes


56.1.1.1.1.1.1 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

To say that the process of producing this thesis was a smooth and unhindered process would be a bigger understatement than saying that it was just a thesis. What you will see in the following 80-odd pages might be what I refer to as 'the last shreds of my sanity', but it is also so much more than that. The idea at the core of this thesis is one I have been toying with since 2016, a good year before I knew what I would be doing for my masters - let alone that I would be switching disciplines from history to media studies. It is a topic I have been building towards slowly from the first paper I wrote for my Academic Skills workshop back in September 2017 to the last paper I wrote from my New Media, Politics and Campaigns course in April 2019. It was why I chose to do this specific programme, and why I chose to do quantitative research even though numbers scare (read: terrify) me; it is the culmination of the past three years of my life. 
	To say that the process of producing this thesis was one that I achieved single-handedly would be a bigger understatement than the one I started this page with. I have a long list of people to thank and I do not plan on shortening it for the sake of being concise. It was the support of each one of these people that came together to become the scaffolding that held me up while I converted a nagging thought into a full-fledged research. To my sister, who reminded me along every step of the way why I undertook this study, and when that failed, told me that I could do this because she did hers in less time. To my parents, for the getting me to where I am in this world but also showing me that I could change it in my own little ways. To my aunt and uncle, who have always told me to reach for the stars when I was just trying for the moon. To my family, who have engaged with me in every discussion about fake news and politics and the state of the world with the same level of interest today as they did 3 years ago. To my girls, who have seen me through the good, bad and ugly, and made themselves available round-the-clock for anything and everything I needed. And finally, to my supervisor, who has what I can only imagine are infinite reserves of patience and understanding, and without whom none of this would have been possible.
-
      I dedicate this thesis to every single person back home who has fought for and continues to fight against all odds and adversity for the freedom of press, for the freedom of speech, for the freedom to live, and for freedom. This one is for you. 

Table of Contents

Abstract and keywords
Acknowledgements
1. Introduction							             		                                  1
      1.1. Context and research questions					                                  1
      1.2. Social and academic relevance					                                  2
      1.3. Structure of the thesis	                          			                                                2 
2. Theoretical Framework									     4
      2.1. Characteristics of the Indian media system	                     			                   4
       2.1.1. Media system 			     		                                                5
       2.1.2. Political system					                                                8
      2.2. Socio-political identities in India					                                10
      2.3. News and disinformation in the digital age					                 11
       2.3.1. Digitization of Indian news					                 11
      		2.3.2. Disinformation in online networks	             		                                              13
       2.3.3. Disinformation in political news		                                                             14
      2.4. Confirmation bias versus informational utility					   15
       2.4.1. Cognitive dissonance and confirmation bias			                 16
      		2.4.2. Risk aversion and information utility			                                17
      2.5. Selective exposure: polarization and partisanship				                 18
       2.5.1. Attitude polarization and selective exposure			                 18
      		2.5.2. Polarization and partisan media	              		                                              20
3. Methods											   23
      3.1. Research method and justification	                          			                                24
      3.2. Sampling						                        		                 25
       3.2.1. Target population				             	                                              25
      		3.2.2. Sampling method			                                                                           26
       3.2.3. Sample characteristics		                                                                           27
      3.3. Operationalization and measures							   39
       3.3.1. Independent variable: political attitudes			                                29
      		3.3.2. Independent variable: frequent news consumers		                                31
       3.3.3. Dependent variable: identification of fake news message	                                31
       3.3.4. Dependent variable: identification of fake news message	                                32
      		3.3.5. Control variables			                                                                           32
       4.1.6. Hypothesis testing		                                                                           33
      3.4. Survey design                          			                                                             35
       3.4.1. Initial survey construction					                                36
      		3.4.2. Pre-test			                                                                                          37
       3.4.3. Final survey design	 	                                                                           40
      	3.5. Reliability and validity                        			                                                             42
       4.1.1. Validity			                        		                                              42
      		4.1.2. Reliability			                                                                                         44
4. Results and Analysis									                 45
      4.1. Descriptive statistics								   45
       4.1.1. Political attitudes versus political orientation			                 45
      		4.1.2. Control variables			                                                                           47
       4.1.3. Exploratory variables		                                                                           48
      	4.2. Hypothesis 1					                         		                 52
      4.3. Hypothesis 2					                         		                 54
      4.4. Hypothesis 3					                         		                 56
      4.5. Hypothesis 4					                         		                 57
      4.5. Hypothesis 5					                         		                 58
      4.5. Hypotheses summary	                 		                         		                 59
5. Conclusion											   60
      5.1. Conclusion and discussion						                                60
      5.2. Implications	                       					                                61
      5.3. Limitations and future research				                                              62
References										              	   64
Appendix A											   70
Appendix B											   82



LIST OF TABLES


Table 1.1 Crosstabulation of extreme politically slanted attitudes and age categories.........................47
Table 2.1 Frequencies of news topics............................................................................................................48
Table 2.2 Descriptive statistics of sources of news information................................................................49
Table 2.3 Descriptive statistics of trustworthiness of sources of news information..............................50
Table 2.4 Frequencies of types of fake news................................................................................................50
Table 2.5 Descriptive statistics of media and fake news opinions in India...............................................51
Table 3.1 Crosstabulation of fake pro-right message and politically slanted attitudes..........................52
Table 3.2 Crosstabulation of real pro-left message and politically slanted attitudes.............................52
Table 4.1 Reports of Mean and Standard Deviation for usefulness of news messages.........................54
Table 4.2 Reports of Mean and Standard Deviation for usefulness of news messages.........................55
Table 5.1 Crosstabulation of attitude-congruent fake messages and politically slanted 
       attitudes.................................................................................................................................56
Table 5.2 Crosstabulation of Attitude-congruent fake message and Extreme politically slanted 
       attitudes.................................................................................................................................57




LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1. Frequencies of extreme politically slanted attitudes...................................................................47
Figure 2. Heat map of political orientation grid............................................................................................47








1. Introduction
1.1. Context and research question
This research focuses on two global phenomena - fake news and polarization of political attitudes - and delves into their characteristics in the Indian context. Fake news, hyper-partisan news and politically slanted information are all examples of disinformation, the latter of which is an all-encompassing term referring to deliberately factually incorrect information (Tucker et al., 2018). The disinformation epidemic is intimately tied with political propaganda, due to its propensity to polarise and radicalise opinions (Carson, 2018; Laser et al., 2018). 
	This is especially true in India, where the nexus between toxic nationalism and political polarisation has been identified as one of the primary driving forces of disinformation proliferation (Chakrabarti, Stengel & Solanki, 2018). The instrumentalisation of disinformation has led to a rise in extremist right-wing politics, with the additional consequence in rural areas of rumour-fuelled violence attributed to the lack of familiarity with online technologies and practices (Uikey & Dubey, 2018). Overall, there is growing polarisation across the country which has been associated with the (mis)use of online media technologies, which increases in intensity during election periods (Gupta, 2019). Its use in political propaganda becomes especially visible during campaigning periods, which in India is a messy, long drawn out or even permanent affair. 
	However, this does not adequately address the audiences of disinformation, the people for whom this information is created or shared. What makes someone engage with disinformation, what makes them believe it, and what makes them - often unwittingly - distributors of fake news. Through an experimental research, this proposed thesis aims to explore a more specific aspect of the aforementioned issue: testing the relationship between political attitudes and engagement with disinformation. Existing research has established that political attitudes influence an individual's relationship with disinformation (Tucker et al., 2018; Van Duyn & Collier, 2019); however, this relationship nor its intricacies have been explicitly explored within India, which differs from western contexts in its socio-political history, system of governance and population demographics. This leads to research questions that this study is guided by:
       RQ: To what extent do an individual's political attitudes influence their engagement with disinformation messages in India?

1.2. Social and academic relevance
Much of the discourse surrounding India's disinformation crisis has been centred around offline acts of violence (Chakrabarti et al., 2018), increasingly focusing on the technologies facilitating the practice rather than the socio-political environment that allows or encourages it (Gupta, 2018). This diverts public attention from insidious processes such as the polarisation of political attitudes - especially within the right - fuelled by weaponization of disinformation (Gupta, 2019). Furthermore, the adoption of disinformation as a tool for campaign propaganda in the upcoming national elections has never been witnessed at this scale, much less studied (Perrigo, 2018). 
	Academically, the discourse surrounding disinformation has been tackled from the perspectives of media platforms and governmental institutions but there exists a gap in addressing the role of the ordinary Indian in this phenomenon. Questions surrounding individual engagement with disinformation have only recently received the in-depth attention that other stakeholders have, as seen in the Indian edition of BBC's Beyond Fake News series (Chakrabarti et al., 2018). The exploration of individual profiles assumes greater importance when considering their role in the proliferation of political disinformation, and a primary aspect to consider are political attitudes. 
	The disinformation epidemic in India is now receiving academic attention, providing some in-depth and contextual insights on the issue (Gupta, 2019). However, these are either brief reports by media outlets (e.g. www.storyful.com), sub-sections in larger reports (e.g. Ireton & Posetti, 2018), or in-depth qualitative research (e.g. Chakrabarti et al., 2018), with theorisation derived from these studies and its applicability to large populations being questioned or challenged (Sarkar, 2018). Due to this, the proposed thesis takes a quantitative approach as it provides objective and unbiased methods to study this complex social phenomenon (Babbie, 2014). Additionally, the external validity and generalisability of quantitative findings are greater than its qualitative counterpart (Neuman, 2014), which is crucial for populations as staggeringly large and diverse as India. The proposed thesis sets out to answer some basic but crucial questions, with the aim of laying a foundation and providing direction for future research. 

1.3. Structure of the thesis
After briefly explain the background and context of this study and introducing the research question, the remainder of the paper has been organized into various chapters. Chapter 2 presents the theoretical framework, which primarily expounds the theories of confirmation bias, selective exposure and polarization that form the foundation of this research, appropriately applies them to the Indian context, and also provides the argumentation behind the 5 sets of hypotheses. Chapter 3 explains the overall research design of this study, by detailing the research method, sampling, operationalization of measures, survey design, and reliability and validity of the research. Throughout the chapter, the various ethical considerations that were kept in mind while designing a study into the sensitive topic of political (dis)information during elections are also touched upon.
       Chapter 4 comprises the results of the statistical tests, with chapter being introduced through some descriptive statistics which enrich the data analysis process, before presenting the analyses to the 5 sets of hypotheses. Finally, Chapter 5 provides the conclusion of the study wherein the overall discussions vis-à-vis the research question are given, and implications of the research outcomes are briefly explored. The chapter concludes with the limitations and recommendations for future research. The last two sections provide a list of all referenced sources and literature, and appendices with additional supporting material.


2. Theoretical Framework
How an individual interacts with information is the result of various conscious and unconscious influences, and this research aims at exploring the specific relationship between internet users and political (dis)information. At the core of this theoretical framework are the concepts of confirmation bias, selective exposure and polarization based in socio-political identities, which are then explored within the context of the disinformation epidemic in the Indian media and political landscape. 
       Though the studies used for the core concepts are primarily based in non-Indian/western countries, theorizations can be drawn and applied to the Indian context due to certain common elements between the otherwise different systems. Furthermore, the lack of India-specific academic research also forms the justification for the initial hypotheses, which replicate the basic assumptions in confirmation bias and selective exposure theories and seeks to establish them in the Indian context. 

2.1. Characteristics of the Indian media system
To establish the context in which this study is situated, India's media and political system will be characterised using the model of comparative media systems as developed by Hallin and Mancini.  This characterization will further aid in the application of theories from other countries to the Indian context, and this contextualization is essential to answer the research questions appropriately. In their seminal study, Hallin and Mancini (2004) compare eighteen western democracies by systematically analysing various dimensions of the media and political system in each country, and further classifying each as being one of three Liberal, Democratic Corporatist, or Polarized Pluralist models. 
       In the follow-up to their first book, Hallin and Mancini (2012) revisit their framework and apply it beyond the western world. Though India is mentioned as the world's largest democracy with a growing news media sector, the authors do not apply their model to the country. Since then, other scholars have used this comparative framework to study the Indian system and this section will primarily rely on Mushtaq & Baig's (2016) classification, using secondary sources to confirm and/or update their analyses. A preliminary reading of the Indian system shows strong parallels to the Polarized Pluralist model, especially considering the political system characterized by clientelism and commercialized media with weak professionalization; however, the early development of democracy and minimal state intervention has brought it dominantly closer to the Liberal model. 
2.1.1. Media system
According to Hallin and Mancini's (2004) framework, a media system is characterized by four dimensions: development of mass media, political parallelism, professionalization, and state intervention. India witnessed the early development of mass media, primarily in the form of a thriving newspaper industry inherited after independence from British colonial rule (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). While Hindi and English language newspapers form majority of national publications, vernacular languages comprise a more significant share of the market and readership (KPMG, 2018). With around 180 languages and over 540 dialects, linguistic diversity has been a prominent driver of growth and development in the mass media industry (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016).  
       This is especially noticeable when looking at the print industry which - in contrast to global trends - continues to grow at a robust (albeit slower) rate because of increasing literacy rates and growing regional markets (KPMG, 2018; Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). In addition to print, electronic media has been historically integral to the industry, witnessing enormous growth since the economic liberalization in 1990 (EY-India, 2018). For example, India is the third largest market for television in terms of viewership, with around 140 million TV households (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). With regards to the digital media industry, India is the second largest online market with over 550 million internet users (Aneez, Neyazi, Kalogeropoulous, & Nielsen, 2018). Offline media such as print and television remain an important source, but social media is becoming the gateway for online news; however, it should be noted that digital news has not replaced print news but rather supplements it (Aneez, et al., 2018; KPMG, 2018). It should be noted that these (and subsequent) figures are national averages which do not reflect the uneven penetration and distribution of media across geographic, linguistic, class, caste, religious and demographic divides (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016).
       Political parallelism - the second dimension to assess media systems and considered to be its defining characteristic - indicates the extent to which media content and organizations are politically biased and affiliated (Hallin & Mancini, 2004). The media are seen as being politically and ideologically divided, with support being expressed to certain parties or in favour of certain ideologies. The political divide is particularly prominent as many media organizations are either owned or indirectly influenced by politicians or their close relatives, and owners and editors of media groups are known to openly express their political allegiances (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). Ownership in the media and telecommunications sector is concentrated in the hands of certain business families, and these industrial giants are known to exert pressure on ruling parties and politicians for financial concessions and benefits (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). The close and interlinked ties between the political and corporate elites has led to the industry being labelled as direct or indirect partisan media or networked media (Chakravarty & Roy, 2013), highlighting the external pluralism that characterizes Indian media. Due to this networked media, the main problem remains to be the objective coverage of news. However, despite the belief that news sources do not provide all sides of a story, the public trust in media is attributed to the diversity and pluralism within the media sector (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). 
       The third dimension of professionalization refers to the independence of the media vis-à-vis the state, and its ability to adhere to the ethical norms and standards of journalistic practice (Hallin & Mancini, 2004). As evidenced by the previous paragraph, the media are not completely autonomous and exhibit weak professionalization. Due to early politicization, Indian media has lacked a coherent code of ethics and specialized training for journalists (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). Additionally, media content being commercially motivated and entertainment oriented (Chakrabarti et al., 2018; Rao & Johal, 2006) has led to the further deterioration of ethical values. Due to high politicization and commercialization, the media developed characteristics of tabloidization, information manipulation, and paid news (Rao & Johal, 2006). Paid news has become a particularly pervasive issue - especially noticeable during election campaigning periods in the last decade - transforming the media into "an instrument for manipulation of public opinion instead of device for authentic news and information" (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016, page 51).
       An example of the widespread practice of paid political news was uncovered in 2018 which severely compromised the integrity of Indian press institution but was subsequently buried by the players involved. The Cobrapost is a non-profit Indian journalistic practice that conducted a sting named 'Operation 136' - a reference to India's press freedom rank in the 2018 - by sending a reporter undercover to 27 of the largest media houses in the country (TheWire, 2018). This reporter implied an association with the BJP's parent organization and revealed plans to use news content to stir communal discord and help tilt the 2019 elections in BJP's favour for a large sum of (black) money (TheWire, 2018). Of those approached, about two dozen were willing to strike business deals to promote the Hindutva agenda in the run up to the elections (TheWire, 2018). 
       Finally, the fourth dimension relates to level of state intervention i.e. the role of the government in the shaping and functioning of the media system (Hallin & Mancini, 2004). Television and radio had been under government control, but the 1991 economic liberalization saw the entry of private stations, leading to the diminishing of governmental monopoly and rise of transnational media organizations and conglomerates (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). Though there is no evidence of direct state intervention, operators are known to give into state and right-wing pressures during period of crises or flared tensions (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). On the other hand, the print industry has historically been free of state control with no direct restrictions being imposed. However, indirect control through external pressures, and political/corporate ownership has resulted in a biased and partisan press (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). With increasing levels of regulation and censorship by the state and attacks on journalists in recent years, India's ranking in the World Press Freedom Index has dropped from the 133rd rank out of 180 countries in 2016 to 140th in 2019, reflecting the second lowest categorization of a 'bad/difficult situation' (Reporters Without Borders, 2019).  
2.1.2. Political system
India is an interesting case among developing countries; it is the largest democracy in the world but is often considered to be a 'deviant democracy', referring to the segmented social structures, high political polarization and instrumentalization (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). Though there is a low level of trust in political elites, the public has consistently shown trust and support of the long history of democratic traditions and strong electoral processes (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016), as reflected in the 2019 General Elections seeing a voter turnout of nearly 68% - the highest in the country's history (Wu & Gettleman, 2019). To better understand this unique political landscape, Hallin and Mancini's five dimensions for political systems will be used to analyse the contemporary political landscape.
       The first dimension - the role of the state - assesses the interventional activity of the state by drawing a distinction between liberal and welfare state democracies (Hallin & Mancini, 2004). The constitution establishes India as a sovereign socialist secular democratic republic and secures inalienable fundamental human rights (Mustaq & Baig, 2006). Social rights, on the other hand, are 'strived' for, allowing for flexibility in its implementation (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). Historically, India has been characterized as a welfare state, but post-liberalization also enabled a free and competitive market to invigorate the stagnating economy (EY-India, 2018). While overall socio-economic conditions have improved since, progress has been uneven and led to greater class divides (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). Despite the major economic upheavals in the last three decades, democracy remains a strongly rooted idea with "political democracy [thriving] way before social democracy could find its place" (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016, p. 53). 
       The second dimension also makes a dichotomous comparison, referred to as consensus versus majoritarian democracy (Hallin & Mancini, 2004). An analysis of the political system using this dimension reveals the changes democratic processes in India have undergone. The Indian National Congress (INC or Congress), a secular centre-left party borne of the independence struggle movement, has dominated the political system of India since the 1950's (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). The unchallenged domination of Congress was followed by the rise and consolidation of the opposition in the late 1960's, leading to a multi-party system (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). Over the following decade, Congress' hold weakened due to shortcomings and failures during its governing years as well as the dynastic stronghold of the Nehru-Gandhi family. Jawaharlal Nehru was the first prime minister of India, his daughter Indira Gandhi succeeded him to become the first female and second prime minister, and her son Rajiv Gandhi was the sixth and youngest prime minister (Wu & Gettleman, 2019). 
       After the period of state emergency imposed by Indira Gandhi from 1975-77, the country witnessed its first non-Congress party - the Janata Party - coming to power in the 1977 General Elections (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). Though the Janata Party dissolved in 1980, former members reconvened to form the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), which has since emerged as the main opposition and alternative to Congress (Consuelo, 2015; Manchanda, 2002). Though Congress has returned to power multiple times since then, political power has been exerted by coalition governments - either the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA) or BJP-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) - since 1989 (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). Congress and the BJP continue to be the two major national political parties, always standing in opposition to each other, though the parties that join their coalitions are not constant (Newsnation.in, 2019). The NDA led by current Prime Minister Narendra Modi had a landslide victory in the 2014 elections, with BJP itself securing enough votes to form majority government (Consuelo, 2015) - a feat they replicated in the 2019 elections (The New York Times, 2019).
       Coalition governments are a hallmark of consensual democracies, highlighting the will of 'as many people as possible' over the 'majority of people' (Lijphart, 1999). However due to the nature of transition in democratic processes, Lijphart (1996) identified India as a deviant case of the majoritarian model and being more consocianational. Consociationalism is observed in countries which are deeply divided into distinct religious, ethnic, racial, or regional segments, with key characteristics of power sharing through coalitions and segmental autonomy (Lijphart, 1996; Mushtaq & Baig). Consociationalism provides a higher quality of governance as well as broader representation - the latter being key in addressing the segmentation and diversity in Indian society (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). 
       The third dimension draws a distinction between individual and organized pluralism, referring to the ideology of liberalism and corporatism respectively (Hallin & Mancini, 2004). India is marked by its diversity but also a scarcity and disparity in access to resources, which are not ideal conditions for individuals to shape their relationship with political processes; therefore, liberalism could not take hold (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). On the other hand, the abundant and cross-cutting of different social groups makes it difficult for organization at a level where policy can be influenced; therefore, organized pluralism is not seen (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). However, the Indian constitution does recognize severely disadvantaged groups (such as backward castes, tribes, and classes) and assures non-discrimination, autonomy and reservation in governmental institutions (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). Religious minorities are also granted similar protection.  
       The fourth dimension indicates the difference between rational-legal authority and clientelism (Hallin & Mancini, 2004). After the displacement of Congress and the "familial charisma of the Gandhi family" (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016, p. 55), the country started transitioning towards rational-legal authority. Institutions like the judiciary, bureaucracy, and the Election Commission of India are autonomous, but a history of party-affiliated clientelism has led to struggles with rational authority and which prevents these bodies from functioning completely independent of any state pressures (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016).
       The final dimension is conceptualized as the difference between moderate and polarized pluralism. Hallin and Mancini's (2004) definition of polarization based in the spectrum of right and left-leaning political ideologies does not adequately reflect the nature of pluralism in India, which sees polarization based more in religious, caste and socio-economic divides. With major conflicts being rooted in religious difference, clashes of Hindus with other minorities (especially Muslims) underscore major socio-political events (Chaturvedi, 2002). The past few decades have witnessed a growing wave of right-wing Hindu or hindutva nationalism, aligning with its increasing presence in the agenda and rhetoric of some political parties and leaders (Consuelo, 2015). Parties like the BJP - whose parent organization Rashtriya Swayamvek Seva (RSS) is staunchly Hindutva - and allied parties have been involved in communal riots between Hindus and Muslims in 1992 and 2002 (Manchanda, 2002; Tripathi, 2005). Congress and its allies have been more secular in their approach but have been accused of playing vote-bank politics in favour of Muslims and other minorities (Chaturvedi, 2002). 
       Indian politics is experiencing high polarization between Hindu nationalism and secular nationalism (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016). However, there are parties, like the Communist Party of India, which are defined by primarily by their political ideology. Polarized pluralist multi-party systems are marked by a history of political violence and extreme ideological gaps, which are features that India has; however, the pluralism is not considered to be a threat to the status of party system and is therefore considered more inclined towards moderate pluralism (Mushtaq & Baig, 2016).  
       
2.2. Socio-political identities in India
India's defining characteristics is her heterogeneity, guided by the core principle of 'unity in diversity' since the beginning of the nation-building process in the 1940's (Alam, 2017). The ideal notion of a nation-state has been primarily understood in its mono-racial or mono-cultural form, and India does not fit into that definition as its social fault lines are multi-dimensional and intersectional, with social structures heavily segmented based on caste, class, ethnicity, language and race (Chowdhury, 2018). In fact, the 'Republic of India' is the result of demarcation of sovereignty under the British colonial rule and further reorganization and consolidation undertaken by leaders of the Indian independence movement, with the key unifying factor being the shared history of the people living in the region (Alam, 2017). 
       The ideal of a homogenized nation-state is linked to the ease of governance and progress, an ideal that India has not historically subscribed to. While democracy rooted in pluralism and diversity are essential features to India's multi-ethnic nation-state, the maintainability of this 'idea of India' has been brought into question, especially by forces within the country that desire India to be unified under a homogenous identity (Chakrabarti et al., 2018; Alam, 2017). In recent years, right-wing Hindutva nationalist forces have started a movement which seeks to consolidate the Indian identity around the Hindu identity - a process that has been fuelled by the rise in popularity of Narendra Modi and the BJP (Chakrabarti et al., 2018).
       The past 30 years of Indian politics as witnessed the rise of Hindu nationalism, which has situated itself in opposition to secular nationalism (Chakrabarti et al., 2018). The Hindutva ideology expresses a range of discourses along the spectrum of mild to extreme but is rooted in the core idea that India is a culturally Hindu country. Here, 'Hindu' is not limited to followers of Hinduism but rather the culture of Hindustan, which comprises the traditions and languages of Sanskrit and Hindi that originated in the ancient Vedic age, as well as the way of life associated with Hinduism. Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs are included within the fold of Hindus, as they belong to religions borne out of India; whereas Muslim and Christians are suspect of having 'extraterritorial loyalties' as their holy lands lie outside of India (Chakrabarti et al., 2018). Through religion is but one aspect of the multi-faceted Indian identity, its importance and centrality to socio-political expression has magnified immensely in recent years - especially since the decisive victory of Modi and the BJP in 2014 and 2019.
       Political ideologies and orientations are a manifestation of socio-political identities, the formation of which can be understand in the context of Tajfel and Turner's social identity theory. This theory posits that an individuals' conception of self is derived from the perceived membership in a social group (Tajfel, 1982). This theory can be used to predict inter group behaviours based on the status of different groups, which can lead to the perception formation of in-groups and out-groups or a 'us versus them' set-up (McKeown, Haji, Ferguson, 2016). Applying this theory to this Indian context, the (upper caste) Hindus have occupied the 'us' position while 'lower' caste Hindus, tribal groups and religious minorities have consistently occupied the 'them' position (McKeown, Haji, Ferguson, 2016). The 'othering' in India socio-political imagination is particularly visible in the treatment of Muslims. Islam entered the Indian subcontinent centuries ago and has been an integral aspect of Indian life (Mistry, 2007), and while Muslims now comprise the largest minority in the country - second in number to the majority Hindus - they are also the most vilified and misrepresented. Though the two communities have existed side by side for centuries now, Muslims have historically and contemporaneously been treated as the "outsiders" or "invaders" (Ahmed, 2017; Kumar, 2011). 
           'Polarized' is a term that has been used with increasing frequency to describe India's socio-political atmosphere, and this polarization is especially visible in the last decade. In their research on fake news and Indian citizens, Chakrabarti, Stengel and Solanki (2018) found evidence of multiple socio-political identities crystallising in response to the rise of Hindutva nationalism and Narendra Modi. They identify three broad hindu/tva groups on the right side of the political spectrum: conservatives, progressives and warriors. It should be noted, 'hindu/tva' is used to indicate that the two are not synonymous as there are also some Hindus who do not ideologically identify with Hindutva. While groups on the right are unified by clear ideologies with similar views and goals, the left is not organized around a political ideology but rather in its opposition to the right. In this sense, they are united in their positioning against certain narratives in the right-leaning political discourse. Chakrabarti and his team (2018) identified four key "left" narratives in their fieldwork: anti Hindutva, anti Modi policies, anti Modi personality, and pro Congress/other parties. They also identify a third socio-political identity that are not moderate or centrists but are disengaged from the (political) news cycle.

2.3. News and disinformation in the digital age
2.3.1. Digitization of Indian news
Indian media has witnessed a dramatic change in the past decade, especially with the rapid increase in digital access and consumption (KPMG, 2018). As mentioned earlier, India is the second largest online market with over 550 million internet users (Aneez, et al., 2018), of which around 315 million are urban users, and the rest from rural areas (IAMAI-Kantar IMRB, 2018). The explosive expansion of internet users comes from the rural areas, which has witnessed a 35% growth in number of users in the 2018; in comparison, urban users have grown by 7% (Economic Times, 2019). The influx of rural users was spurred by the launch of a new mobile network operator 'Jio' by telecom giant Reliance Industries in September 2016 (KPMG, 2018), whose competitively priced data plans brought in over 50 million new users online by the end of the year (EY-India, 2018). Data consumption per user has grown by eight times (KPMG, 2018), and as a significant number of these new users were from rural areas, mobile internet became was often their first contact with the online world (Chakrabarti, et al, 2018). 
       While print circulation is dominated by Hindi and vernaculars, English newspapers are leading in developing digital strategies (KPMG, 2018). Therefore, the reports that this section relies on primarily rely on samples of English-language news users with internet access, and subsequent generalizations are drawn from that small but significant subset (Aneez, et al., 2018). Overall findings suggest: 
"English-language Indian news users with internet access are embracing a mobile-first, platform-dominated media environment with search engines, social media, and messaging applications playing a key role in how people access and use news in a setting characterised by low trust in many news media, high concerns over the possible implications of expressing political views, and widespread worries about different kinds of disinformation.
(Aneez, et al., 2018, page 8)
       The rapid move to digital and mobile-based media has had significant consequences on journalistic practices (Augey & Alcaraz, 2019) as well how Indians access and engage with news information (Aneez, et al., 2018). The mobile-first and platform-dominated market is further established with an overwhelming majority of users relying on distributed discovery rather than direct discovery of news, which demonstrates how central intermediaries such as Facebook and Whatsapp have become to online news distribution (Aneez, et al., 2018). Furthermore, social media has low barriers of entry compared to offline publications, therefore providing larger number and variety of sources. A consequence of receiving news via social media - especially with Facebook - is that the lines between personal and public, news and entertainment, hard and soft news, and fact and opinion have become blurred, as they appear in the same feed (Chakrabarti, et al., 2018). 
       India is the largest market for Whatsapp, and the second largest for Facebook (EY-India, 2018), and the Reuters Institute India Digital News Report (2018) indicates that Facebook and Whatsapp are the most widely used online sources for news. Though online news consumers show varying degrees of interest in and frequency of news consumption, a higher use of different sources emerges as compared to peers in other countries - which could be a result of the tradition of subscribing to multiple newspapers regularly (Aneez, et al., 2018). Along with higher engagement with news are the higher levels of concern about openly expressing political beliefs online; this can be viewed in the context of recent cases in India wherein over 20 individuals - among the general public, journalists or critical commentators - have been arrested since 2012 for sharing 'offensive or threatening' material against politicians (Aneez, et al., 2018).
       As a platform, Facebook has an audience larger than any singular media outlet in India making this platform central in existing traditional media promoting their digital offerings. Additionally, Facebook's instant news feature - which allows news reading on lower internet bandwidths - has made it the preferred destination for users (Aneez, Chattapadhyay, Parthasarathi, & Nielsen, 2017). Due to the widespread competition for audience attention, news is constructed to be attention grabbing and stand out in an ultra-competitive market (Aneez, et al. 2017). 
       In terms of the online sources that users rely on, the digital versions of legacy print brands still remain the primary sources of online news. However, there is a growing number of alternative and partisan news portals emerging that are feeding on the lack of trust the public has on mainstream media to appropriately and consistently represent their views (Aneez, et al., 2018). Overall, trust in media and platforms plays out differently in the online landscape where direct (e.g. websites, apps) and distributed (e.g. search engines, social media) discovery complement each other. There is a general low trust in news, but that level of trust becomes higher when combined with distributed discovery (Aneez, et al., 2018). However, the proliferation of fake news has shaken the trust and credibility of news sourced from social media, leading to future of online news being closely scrutinized (KPMG, 2018). 
2.3.2. Disinformation in online networks
Fake news has become a prominent term in media-politico discourse and is increasingly seen as "one of the greatest threats to democracy, free debate and the [democratic] order" (Carson, 2019, para 1). Fake news refers to false information distributed via traditional and digital channels, ranging from hyper-partisan to misleading to completely fabricated content (Aneez, et al., 2018; Chakrabarti et al., 2018; Tufekci, 2018). Though fake news is the most commonly used term, 'disinformation' has been identified as the most appropriate terminology as it specifically indicates the deliberately misleading nature of this content (Tucker et al., 2018), which is what this study focuses on. 
       Within the Indian context, the coverage given to the disinformation crisis has grown considerably in the past three years. The English language media were the first to address the crisis, with vernacular news engaging with this discourse in more recent times as the issue spouted tangible consequence (Chakrabarti et al., 2018). The proliferation of disinformation has led to the credibility of online news being brought into question by industry experts as well as the public, though the latter primarily comes from English language audiences (KPMG, 2018). However, the discourse has primarily focused on the technologies through which disinformation is shared and subsequent violence, and not the socio-political conditions that allow it to thrive (Gupta, 2018). In this discourse, the role of the public in the distribution of this content is either missing or portrayed as a victim of forces beyond their control and having minimal agency. 
       There is a huge volume of information competing on for the limited attention span of users. One consequence of the high competition - especially on Facebook - is "unsubstantiated content [being] fed to the readers simply for sensationalism" (Aneez, et al., 2017, p. 59). While Facebook is the primary source of news for almost three times as many people as Twitter, the latter is used from breaking news updates and becomes the site for public debate and extended distribution of disinformation- even though it is seen as being a toxic environment in India (Aneez, et al., 2018). The use of Whatsapp as a source of news brings with it the dynamic of news shared between private - and therefore more like-minded - networks, which has played a role in the distribution of disinformation (Aneez, et al., 2018). 
2.3.3. Disinformation in political news
       The BBC Report (2018) on fake news and the ordinary citizen has been the most comprehensive and credible study conducted in India and will form the foundation of how this thesis applies and understands various theories to the Indian socio-political context. In their study, Chakrabarti and his team (2018) identified four key narratives that have appeared in fake news messages that are especially effective in fooling readers. These narratives are: Hindu power and superiority, preservation and revival, progress and national pride, and the personality and prowess of Modi (Chakrabarti, et al., 2018). This lends an answer to the widespread question of why citizens engage with disinformation, revealing that the validation of socio-political identity overrules the need to verify its truthfulness. Though similar fake news tactics have been observed on both the right and left side, the volume of right leaning disinformation has been noted as being far more significant and organized (Chakrabarti, et al., 2018).  
       The surge in political disinformation in India aligns with the election of Narendra Modi as Prime Minister and the BJP to the national government in 2014 (Chakrabarti et al., 2018; Consuelo, 2015). Modi and the BJP are active proponents of the Hindutva agenda, and the rising tide of Hindutva has been identified as driving citizens to spread misinformation (Chakrabarti et al., 2018), fuelled by the incendiary and communally divisive rhetoric of the BJP (Edwards & Ramamurthy, 2017). Research has also suggested that the disinformation ecosystems of the right are more organised than of the left and overlap with support networks of Modi and BJP - examples of the conflation and consolidation of the 'right' identity with Pro-Modi or BJP attitudes (Chakrabarti et al., 2018). 
	BJP's 2014 election campaign had a political communication strategy with a pointed focus on social media (Bajaj, 2017). Modi's social media campaign has been one of the most successful made by a public figure (Pal, 2015), further establishing social media as an effective campaign tool in India (Bajaj, 2017). The General Elections, which leads to the appointment of the national government, takes place every 5 years, most recently occurring in May 2019 (Perrigo, 2019). After the success of BJP in 2014 - attributed to their extensive media strategies - the 2019 elections witnessed even more rigorous online campaigning by all parties (Perrigo, 2019), creating a huge surge in disinformation through political propaganda (Shanker, 2018). 
	The big social media networks, such as Facebook and Twitter, are where a wealth of disinformation distribution takes place (Laser et al., 2018). However, Whatsapp has taken primacy in India in terms of being the platform of choice for most internet users who engage with and share disinformation (Uikey & Dubey, 2018), with more than 90% of smartphone users having it installed (Perrigo, 2019). The potential of Whatsapp for (dis)information dissemination has been noticed; political parties are increasingly investing resources into creating thousands of Whatsapp groups to share political messages for the upcoming elections, leading to it being called India's first 'Whatsapp Elections' (Chakrabarti et al., 2018; Perrigo, 2019).

2.4. Confirmation bias versus informational utility
The exponential rise of online media has led to an abundance of available information, making online environments a space that allow audiences to pick and choose content with great specificity (Bennet & Iyengar, 2008), laying the groundwork for selective exposure based on interplay of factors such as confirmation bias and informational utility (Stroud, 2017).
2.4.1: Cognitive dissonance and confirmation bias
The theory of cognitive dissonance proposed by Festinger (1962) is predicated on the idea that individuals seek information that aligns with existing attitudes, striving for cognitive consistency and avoiding discomfort caused by an internal contradiction in beliefs. This implies that individuals actively or unconsciously avoid situations that could cause instances of cognitive dissonance, and - by extension - seek out information that aligns with previously held beliefs (Knobloch-Westerwick & Kleinman, 2012). This tendency to seek, favour or interpret information in a way that affirms pre-existing beliefs is known as having a confirmation bias (Knobloch-Westerwick, Mothes, & Polavin, 2017). 
	Social media has risen in importance as a source of political news and information (Alcott & Gentzkow, 2017). With the continuously increasing online information choice, the process of how individuals select political messages becomes even more important. Individuals who follow news will typically be presented with a variety of topics simultaneously (Knobloch-Westerwick & Meng, 2009). This would be especially applicable in the case of online users in India, who are characterized by their distributed consumption of news from a variety of sources (Aneez, et al., 2018). Regarding how this news information is interpreted, one way for an individual to minimize cognitive dissonance when they are confronted with attitude-discrepant information can be to question the veracity of the message itself and interpret it as false information or 'fake news'. Therefore, in the case of disinformation, the theory of confirmation bias can be extending to theorise that individuals would not be motivated to doubt attitude-affirming information and be motivated to doubt attitude-discrepant information - in an effort to maintain cognitive consistency. This lends to the testing of the first set of hypotheses:   
Hypothesis 1a: Individuals are more likely to accurately identify disinformation when the message is incongruent with their political attitudes.
Hypothesis 1b: Individuals are less likely to perceive a message as disinformation when it is congruent with their political attitudes.
Hypothesis 1c: Individuals are likely to perceive a message as 'real news' faster when it is congruent with their political attitudes.
       Studies have been conducted to specifically explore the influence of confirmation biases with regards to political (dis)information - especially in the election campaigning period (e.g. Allcott & Gentzkow, 2017; Knobloch-Westerwick & Kleinman, 2012) - wherein selectively attending to messages is motivated by preparing or adapting to future socio-political changes. 
2.4.2. Risk aversion and informational utility 
While the theory of confirmation bias has formed the foundation of psycho-social understandings of individuals' engagement with attitude-discrepant and -affirming information, subsequent research has not always supported the primacy of this theory. Empirical evidence has revealed that there are extenuating circumstances when attitude-discrepant information is actively sought out by individuals, a key factor in these circumstances being informational utility (Knobloch-Westerwick & Kleinman, 2012). While a confirmation bias refers to individuals seeking out attitude-affirming information to avoid cognitive dissonance (Mullainathan & Washington, 2006), informational utility dictates that if a message is perceived to be useful - and therefore, has high utility - an individual will engage with it regardless of its alignment with existing attitudes because then "information functions as an aid for adaptation to the environment" (Knobloch-Westerwick & Kleinman, 2012, p. 171) i.e. a tool for risk aversion.
       Though the two concepts are not always mutually exclusive, they often clash due to the differing definitions of what individuals classify as being 'useful'. This dynamic is not as simple to establish as it can be influenced by an interplay of other context-specific forces, which is something this study seeks to explore through its second set of hypotheses. In a socio-political context, the information utility versus confirmation bias struggle can be defined by an interplay of factors such as personal political history (e.g. beliefs, party loyalty), external environmental factors (e.g. election period), news consumption patterns (e.g. variety in sources, frequency of news consumption) and so on (Knobloch-Westerwick, et al., 2017). 
       Looking at (pre)election periods specifically, the dynamics surrounding media messages and consumption patterns are impacted by informational utility, where the definition of what is useful takes on a new character: placing personal opinions in the larger context of political outcomes (Mullainathan & Washington, 2006). Research has pointed to informational utility overriding the need for confirmation bias in election periods due to the increased perceived value of political information when it could inform audiences regarding major policy upheavals that accompany changes in government (Knobloch-Westerwick & Kleinman, 2012). However, these consumption patterns can differ among audiences of different political orientations, leading to an asymmetry in confirmation bias. For example, individuals whose preferred party is expected to lose an election do not show strong confirmation biases and are more inclined to consume content that is incongruent with their beliefs i.e. from the opposing side, to prepare themselves for incoming changes in government (Knobloch-Westerwick & Kleinman, 2012). On the other hand, individuals whose preferred party is likely to come to power show a greater confirmation bias than their counterparts due to not needing to adapt to an attitude-dissenting environment.  
       Applying this to the Indian context, wherein the incumbent right-wing Modi and BJP were expected to - and did - return to power, the asymmetry in confirmation bias caused by informational utility in election periods is tested through the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 2a: Right-leaning individuals are likely to find attitude-congruent messages more useful than attitude-discrepant messages.
Hypothesis 2b: Left-leaning individuals are likely to find attitude-discrepant messages more useful than attitude-congruent messages.

2.5. Selective exposure: polarization and partisanship
2.5.1. Attitude polarization and selective exposure
Selective exposure harkens back to the phenomena of an abundance of information causing individuals to selectively allocate their attention to certain messages by demonstrating preference and avoidance based on a variety of intersectional factors (Stroud, 2010) - one of which is the previously mentioned theory of confirmation bias. If individuals are motivated in their selection of information by a confirmation bias, this leads to a polarizing effect - especially on the internet where it is possible to completely avoid attitude-discrepant messages (Knobloch-Westerwick & Kleinman, 2012). This becomes all the more relevant in the case of political messages, where selective attention to attitude-affirming information can impact opinion formation, reduce political tolerance, and lead to greater polarization of personal opinions and in the larger public imagination (Knobloch-Westerwick & Meng, 2009). This assumes significance when considering how online environments are increasingly becoming important sources of information and sites for political debate (Ireton & Posetti, 2018). 
       This further lends to Bennet and Iyengar's (2008) theory of the internet ushering in a 'new era of minimal effects', arguing that if individuals can easily avoid dissonant messages, then they will - thus magnifying polarizing patterns of biased exposure. However, other scholars argue that the characteristics of the online media environment (i.e. easy access to abundant information) which allows for confirmation-guided search are the same characteristics that allow individuals access to a variety of views if confirmation biases are not a motivating factor (Holbert, Garrett, & Gleason, 2010).    
       An individual's personal attitudes are central to the studies in the previously mentioned theories but only a few explore how varying degrees of attitude intensity lead to a differently pronounced relationship with information. Knobloch-Westerwick and Meng (2009) use the works of Brannon, Tagler and Eagly (2007) as a foundation to explore how greater attitude strength influences the preference for attitude-consistent information, suggesting that extreme attitudes create greater cognitive dissonance and therefore, lead to higher avoidance. Extending this to the case of disinformation, individuals holding extreme political attitudes would experience more dissonance and more readily dismiss the information as being false. In the case of individuals with more moderate attitudes, being presented with attitude-discrepant information might not evoke as strong a dissonance reaction - as compared to their more extreme attitude holding counterparts - and the need for confirmation bias would be less likely to override their critical filter. Additionally, political polarisation in India has also manifested in the level of trust individuals show in news media; 
"India displays a different pattern, where trust among both those respondents who identify with the BJP and those who identify with parties currently or recently aligned with the UPA generally trust the news more than those respondents who do not identify as partisans, perhaps suggesting some discontent with the perceived relations between much of the political establishment and the news media covering it."
       (Aneez, et al., 2018, page 18) 
       This points to moderate, non-partisan and disengaged individuals expressing less trust in news media - adding a critical layer in how political information is interpreted. This theorisation is tested through the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 3: Individuals with moderate political attitudes are more likely to accurately identify disinformation messages than their more politically extreme counterparts.
       Applying this relationship to the Indian context, the left-leaning identity and attitudes are less consolidated and radicalised as their right-leaning counterparts (Chakrabarti, et al., 2018), and therefore would not experience a dissonance to the same degree. Furthermore, disinformation ecosystems in the right have been observed as being more organized and producing a larger volume of disinformation - which was previously seen narratives present in the bulk of political disinformation (Chakrabarti, et al., 2018). Additionally, if the theorisation backing the previous hypothesis holds true in the Indian context as well, then extreme-right leaning individuals would experience the most dissonance when confronted with attitude-discrepant information. This leads to the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 4a: Left-leaning individuals are more likely to accurately identify attitude-congruent disinformation than their right-leaning counterparts.
Hypothesis 4b: Extreme right-leaning individuals are less likely to identify attitude-congruent disinformation than extreme left-leaning counterparts. 
2.5.2. Polarization and partisan media
Another important question is the relationship between partisan media and audience polarisation: do partisan media lead to polarised attitudes or does it simply attract already polarised audiences? It is increasingly believed that the growing variety and availability of news sources encourages greater consumer selectivity which - when guided by a confirmation bias - leads to political polarised attitudes (Bennet & Iyengar, 2008). However, this correlation has also been challenged by scholars who subscribe to the 'limited effects' model which posits that media consumption does not cause attitude changes but can bolster pre-existing attitudes (Mutz & Martin, 2001). There is an additional requirement of more context-specific research outside of the US Presidential system (Knobloch-Westerwick et al., 2015) and those challenging correlation as a simplistic understanding of polarisation by attributing it simple to the changing media landscape. For example, Knobloch-Westerwick & Kleinman (2012) argue that, unlike traditional media, which - if polarized - pushes information, online media is sought out and necessary information is pulled by individuals.  
	Stroud's (2010) research into selective exposure provided evidence that consistently points to selective exposure (from partisan media) leading to increased polarisation, which gives the power of media influence greater importance. This is not to say that media effects are identified as the singularly fuelling polarised attitudes - as personal predisposition can moderate the effect certain media discourses - but challenges the limited effects perspective which underplayed the impact media images have on audiences (Bennet & Iyengar, 2008; Gerber, Huber, & Washington, 2009). Stroud further points to the importance of considering the characteristics of both the media and the audience before classifying the political effects of the former. This becomes an especially important factor to keep in mind for this study, which sets out to test the relationship between media messages and personal beliefs.  
	Analysing the media is one way of addressing this debate - as it forms the lens through which information is communicated to the public - especially considering how a diversified or polarised information environment gives news outlets greater economic motives to cater to consumers polarised news preferences (Bennet & Iyengar, 2008). However, that does not adequately consider the media consumption patterns of the individual audiences. Partisanship - both from the media and the audience - is strongly correlated with attitudes (Gerber et al., 2009). However, when considering the variety of factors that influence media behaviour and the contentious nature of the relationship between media effects, one can keep in mind that  "on one hand, partisan selective exposure and polarization may spark more political participation-a democratically desirable goal. [...] On the other hand, partisan selective exposure and polarization may engender a less tolerant and more fragmented public" (Stroud, 2010, p 551). 
	One such factor that can override the confirmation bias fuelled selective exposure is media consumption habits. Studies (e.g. Knobloch-Westerwick & Kleinman, 2012), provide evidence that habitual online news consumption overriding a confirmation bias; the inverse - that individuals with infrequent consumption show significant confirmation bias - is also confirmed. The role of news consumption behaviour is explored through the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 5: Individuals who are frequent news consumers are more likely to accurately identify disinformation. 
	As mentioned earlier, many theorisations in this field emerge from US-based studies, which bring into question their applicability to India. However, there are certain commonalities between the American and Indian media and political systems - exemplified by their classification as Liberal models - which allow for some extrapolations from one context to another. For example, though both countries have different systems of governance, India has also historically seen two major parties compete in the national elections (Consuelo, 2015), creating a dichotomy similar to that as with Republicans and Democrats (Gerber et al., 2010). It should also be noted that voter behaviour in India is similar to the US in the sense that an individual's political orientation is often defined in support or opposition to a certain political party (Benoit, 2007), though in India the right is more affiliated with a singular party i.e. the BJP, and the left is unified more by its opposition to the right (Chakrabarti et al., 2018). This provides adequate grounds to believe that theorised relationships from studies based in the US could be extended to the Indian context; however, the larger number of facets - and therefore confounding factors - in the Indian socio-political identity require these observations to be tested rather than assumed.  


3. Methodology
3.1. Research Method and Justification
Given the nature of this thesis' topic and the goals the study, quantitative methods were selected to execute data collection and analysis. Quantitative methods allow for the objective measurement of observable social phenomenon by a detached researcher (Neuman, 2014), which is something that qualitative research does not permit due to its inherently subjective nature. Maintaining objectivity and transparency is an important concern for this research, as delving into political topics in the current climate of polarization and sensitivity in India has led to studies being criticized and questioned based on perceptions of certain political agendas being favoured - an example of which is the right-wing take down of the BBC Beyond Fake News report (News Laundry, 2018). Additionally, quantitative methods are chosen when a research needs to study a large set of subjects, which is essential for this thesis to be representative of the sub-section of the population it studies. In any case, given the size and diversity of India's population, a large sample is necessary for the results to be statistically significant and generalizable. 
	The subject of fake news is a broad and highly complex topic but the recency of its identification in India as a significant socio-political problem has led to the present scenario, wherein only a few context-specific qualitative studies have been undertaken. The aspect of the fake news phenomenon this thesis explores is the relationship between disinformation and political attitudes, as a review of existing literature (e.g. Chakrabarti, et al., 2018; Aneez, et al., 2018) has revealed that political identity is a key factor - especially in the process of individual engagement. This relationship is then examined using the previously mentioned theories of selective exposure and confirmation biases. As well-established theories are extended to conditions that have not yet been academically tested, this study has elements of both explanatory and exploratory research (Neuman, 2014). 	
       As the overarching research question is tested through causal hypotheses, experiments were identified as the most appropriate method to execute this study. Experimental designs derive principles typically found in natural science research methods, lending it the tag of being more logical and 'scientific' amongst social science research methods and highly effective for explanatory research (Neuman, 2014). Guided by a well-focused research question, using experimental methods affords the researcher a high degree of control to determine conditions for causality to be observed by minimizing interference of non-tested variables and gather powerful evidence to establish a relationship between variables (Neuman, 2014). In other words, with experiments this thesis can test the influence of political attitudes on engagement with disinformation through exposure to carefully constructed stimuli in a controlled setting, while also allowing for the consideration of other variables. 	
       In methodological terms, experimental research designs are strongly preferred over methods that rely on self-reporting as individual users are not typically aware of the exact motivations behind their media selection choices. Extending this logic to this study, individuals cannot be relied upon to accurately assess their engagement with disinformation, especially because distributing or believing these messages are not conscious decisions for the average individual (Chakrabarti, et al., 2018). With experimental research providing an objective, unbiased, scientific approach to study this complex social phenomenon (Babbie, 2014), this study benefits from executing its research through this method. Furthermore, previous studies on political polarisation and confirmation bias have also been conducted through experimental designs, with experiments being a common characteristic of research in the paradigm of selective exposure (Knobloch-Westerwick, 2015). 
       As this thesis assesses the attitudes and responses of individuals to political (dis)information presented in the form of textual stimuli, research is carried out through an online survey experiment. Surveys allow the researcher to construct a regulated and standardized experimental design with flexibility in gathering a mix of self-reported and observed data. A survey also arouses less suspicion from participants over the study being an experiment and makes the cover story more effective in its believability. Given the scope and resources available for a master's thesis, an online survey eases the process of administration for a researcher who is not situated in the country where the sample is drawn from. Furthermore, online administration enables the collection of a higher number of responses (Neuman, 2014) without being restricted to a specific geographic region. The drawback of online data collection restricting a sample to internet users does not arise for this thesis, as the sub-set of the Indian population that is being studied are internet-using, English speaking audiences. Therefore, online experimental survey research has been identified as the ideal method to achieve the goals of this study. 
       This study was constructed as a within-subject experiment with a 2x2 factorial design. A factorial design indicates the testing of two factors at two levels each - with four treatment conditions in total (Ryan, 2007). The treatment conditions in this study are short news messages, of which two factors are messages that express either a pro-left or pro-right political slant, and the levels being factually incorrect/fake or factually correct/real news. A within-subjects experiment indicates that each respondent is exposed to all the experimental conditions, which in this case would be the news message. Therefore, the treatment will be sets of 4 stimuli, each of which is a short message with politically slanted fake or real news, which are then presented to each respondent in a randomised order
       This survey was designed on the online survey software Qualtrics as a within-subject experiment with four treatment conditions, which means that each participant was exposed to all four conditions. The experimental design will be detailed further in later sections.

3.2. Sampling
3.2.1. Target population
As the research question is concerned with political attitudes and disinformation, a certain degree of engagement with or awareness of the current Indian political landscape is essential to the study. Therefore, the target population for this study are Indians who are currently residing in the country, in order to limit the influence of confounding variables and yield the most valid results. The only other consideration for the sample is that of age, wherein the minimum age of participants must be 18 years, which is the legal voting age in India. Additionally, research has shown voter eligibility as contributing to the strengthening of polarisation of political opinions (Mullainathan & Washington, 2006). Due to the language of the survey and its method of distribution, an expected characteristic of the sample is that participants will be English-speaking individuals with access to internet services. This means that the sample will not be representative of the entire population of adult resident Indians but will be restricted to the sub-set of English language media consumers with internet-access. Previous studies have also shown that this sub-section of the population is not equally distributed along demographic lines, with a skew towards affluent, male, and educated individuals (Aneez, et al. 2018).  
	According to the Methodological Guidelines 2018-19 of the Department of Media and Communication of Erasmus University Rotterdam, a master thesis executed through a survey requires between 150 to 250 respondents, and an experiment requires a minimum of 30 participants per condition. Based on these recommendations from the Methodological Guidelines, while also keeping in mind that this thesis uses a within-subjects experimental survey design to study a large population, the sample size of this research should be a minimum of 200 participants. A sample of this size - which excludes respondents surveyed during the pre-test and pilot phases - would have enough power to measure and find relevant effects.
3.2.2. Sampling method
Ideally, the sample would be determined by non-purposive sampling as is done with most quantitative research (Babbie, 2014). However, this thesis relies on a mix of purposive, convenience and self-selection sampling due to time and monetary constraints given the scope of this thesis. Furthermore, due to the sensitive nature of political disinformation as a research topic and its administration in the days leading up to election results, the survey was not distributed by the researcher herself in order to maintain a level of anonymity. Instead, specific individuals were identified - hereafter called 'distribution channels' - and recruited to share the survey within their personal and professional networks. 
       The most significant aspect of the sample is political attitudes, with the number of left and right leaning respondents needing to be as close to a 50-50 ratio as possible. However, it was deemed difficult to screen respondents based on their political attitudes before they fill out the survey - especially since doing so might hint at what the survey is testing. Therefore, distribution channels were recruited based on the networks they have access to, with a focus on accessing age groups older than 30, different educational levels, varied professional backgrounds, metropolitan cities other than Delhi and Mumbai, and areas beyond North India. By aiming for a demographically diverse sample, the researcher expected to yield variations in political attitudes as well.      
       Purposive sampling refers to a sample that is selected based on certain population characteristics and objectives of the study (Lavrakas, 2008), which in this case was guided by the need for distribution channels who could create a more diverse sample and potentially providing more-or-less equal variation in political stance. There is an element of convenience sampling, as the distribution channels recruited were ones accessible to the researcher (Battaglia, 2011); however, a bulk of the respondents are individuals approached by the distribution channel and unknown to the researcher. Finally, as most respondents were contacted by the distribution channels, there would have been situations where the survey was shared but respondents either do not respond or outrightly refuse. This is the case of self-selection sampling, wherein the participation by a potential respondent is determined by their own voluntariness (Sterba & Foster, 2011), which could interfere with the sample being varied enough to produce statistically significant results (Olsen, 2011). It is likely that individuals approached by the distribution channels exercised their right to not participate - or abandon participation during the survey - given the topical and sensitive nature of the survey. However, self-selection sampling comes with the benefit of voluntariness to participate being motivated by interest in the topic, which in this case would benefit the research. On the flipside, individuals who are not necessarily interested in political news topics are still likely to come across and engage disinformation messages (on social media, at least). 
	 The distribution channels were provided an anonymous link to the Qualtrics survey on the 20th of May 2019 and asked to share it within their networks immediately so that responses could be collected before election results were announced on the 23rd of May. A short data collection period was chosen so that the news information the participants were exposed to were not prominently debunked, dated or irrelevant news topics in English media discourse - especially as politically aware and motivated individuals increase engagement with news in the period leading up to vote counting and announcement of the election results. 
3.2.3. Sample characteristics
In total, 369 responses to the survey were recorded by Qualtrics, of which 347 were filled out through anonymous links provided to the distribution channels and 22 from the social media of the researcher. From this set of responses 128 were partially filled, of which 123 were omitted for reasons of providing incomplete profiles of participants and potentially skewing the results. It should be noted that the 5 partial responses that are included in the final dataset are considered because the respondents had filled the survey up until and including the statement set on political attitudes. This means that the only block missing in these responses were the questions on news consumption, and as that block is of importance only to test Hypothesis 5, the researcher chose to include them in the final dataset. An additional 4 complete responses were omitted as they were filled out by individuals aged below 18 years, which was the previously established minimum age requirement for respondents.
       The number of incomplete responses could be attributed to the politically sensitive nature of some questions, as 63.4% of the partial responses recorded showed that the participant was exposed to at least one of the political news messages before abandoning the survey. This brings back the previously expressed concern of the researcher that the sensitivity of the topic would dissuade participation; this is further exemplified through the feedback received by a few distribution channels over the nature of some questions - especially those about Modi and the BJP - making them uncomfortable. For example, one participant expressed, "Apologies [...] I had to quit the survey midway. All questions popping up for me turned out to be on Modi and BJP and current situation. Without any exception! [...] I have asked group members to contribute and 3 of them confirmed [what happened with] me. I will attempt later if similar queries don't pop up". The same individual attempted the survey again and sent follow-up feedback: "I suspended it after two queries. I may be overthinking [...]  but [...] she should be aware [...] the queries are a little too close to what is happening in India politics today which I personally believe is little sensitive". However, this is not to say that political sensitivities are the only dissuading factor; the length of the survey and complexity of certain questions could also be a factor, as 23.4% abandoned the survey after being exposed to all the political news messages, at which point questions became more complex in their structure and about 30% of survey was still remaining.
	After omitting the non-valid responses, the final dataset consisted of 242 responses, exhibiting a response rate of 65.6% and meeting the minimum sample size requirement for this thesis. Between the first and last recorded response of this dataset, the data collection period was from 21st to 26th of May, extending a few days beyond the election results day. However, 95% of the responses were recorded in the crucial period before the 24th May.
	The sample was not disproportionately skewed towards one gender, with 50% identifying as male, 48.8% as female, and 1.2% preferring not to disclose their gender. The average age of the respondent was 34 years (M= 34.65, SD=13.36), with 38.4% aged below 25 years, 18.6% between the ages of 25 and 34 years, 13.6% between 35 and 44 years, 14.9% between 45 and 54 years, and 12.8% over the age of 55 years. Most of the respondents had studied up to a collegiate level, with 50% having obtained a Bachelors/under-graduate degree, followed by 42.6% holding a Masters/post-graduate degree, and 5% had a Ph.D./Doctorate degree. Of the remaining, 1.7% studied up to grade 12th and 0.8% chose the 'other' option. Regarding status of employment, 57.8% are employed - 35.1% in the private sector and 22.7% in government/public sector - and 2.9% are unemployed, and 1.2% are retired. Of the remaining, 32.2% are students and 5.8% chose the 'other' option (e.g. consulting, freelance work). 
       Regarding political attitudes of respondents, 22.7% were identified as holding extreme left-leaning attitudes, 17.8% as left, 22.3% as moderate, 14% as right, and 23.1% as extreme right-leaning. Regarding a respondent's self-identification with being a news consumer, 5.8% said they never consider themselves to be news consumers, 39.7% said sometimes, 16.5% feel so about half the time, 24% most of the time, and 13.6% always. Among these respondents, 7% claim to never actively search for news, while 49.2% claim to search sometimes, 18.2% do it about half the time, 18.2% do it most of the time, and 7% always search. Coming to verification of news content, 14% claim to never double-check the news they consume, 46.3% do it sometimes, 13.6% do it about half the time, 17.4% do it most of the time, and with the lowest, 8.3% of respondents claim that they always verify news content. 
       Regarding language in which news is consumed, 87.6% of respondents identified English as the primary language in which they consume news - which was expected as the online survey was in English. For the remaining, Hindi was the primary language for 5%, Malayalam for 2.9%, 0.8% each for Gujarati and Marathi, and 0.4% each for Assamese and Telugu. It should be clarified that the primary language in which news is consumed should not be confused with the respondent's first or native language. 56% of respondents indicated secondary languages in which they consume news, with 31% of the total sample having indicated Hindi, 10.3% indicated English, 7% indicated Malayalam, 1.7% indicated Gujarati, 1.2% each for Bengali and Tamil, 0.8% indicated Marathi, and the remaining distributed between French, German, Norsk, Odia, Telugu and Urdu. 
	The demographics of this sample are more-or-less representative of the target population of this study. As mentioned earlier, studies conducted on English-speaking internet using samples skewed towards the male, affluent, well-educated. Apart from gender - which sees an almost equal distribution - in this sample 97.6% of respondents have at least obtained or are in the process of obtaining an under-graduate degree, and only 2.9% are unemployed. 

3.3. Operationalisation and measures
In social science research, it is imperative that abstract social phenomena and concepts are clearly defined into measurable units called variables. The first critical step in establishing a causal hypothesis is identifying the independent and dependent variables (Neuman, 2014). This research primarily explores the influence of the independent variable of personal political attitudes on the dependent variable of engagement with disinformation. However, the relationship between the two cannot be broken down to a direct cause-and-effect, as there are other factors which could also impact this relationship. Amongst these other factors, this study will account for few relevant independent variables while trying to limit the influence of confounding variables that weaken the causal relationship between the studied variables. This study will also control for demographic variables if statistically significant variations arise during data analysis. 
3.3.1. Independent variable: political attitudes
The first and most significant independent variable is political attitudes, referring to the opinions of an individual regarding a socio-political ideology, issue, party and/or politician. This study adopts three approaches to measure socio-political leanings, of which two allow respondents to self-report their political orientation and the third extrapolates political attitudes based on the respondent's response to a set of questions. For the purpose of this academic study, political attitudes are understood as a manifestation of an individual's socio-political identity and these political attitudes are used to test the hypotheses. This study positions these political attitudes against the backdrop of national politics and particularly in relation to the BJP and PM Modi, whose growing power and influence since 2014 has aligned with some major changes in the socio-political sphere.
	Explicit self-reported political leanings are not exclusively used to test the hypotheses for various reasons. Firstly, the researcher had cause to believe that respondents might hesitate to reveal or incorrectly indicate their leanings, especially in the case of right-leaning or extreme attitude holding respondents. Secondly, a respondents' understanding of their socio-political identity might not align with the researcher's conceptualization for the purpose of this study. Therefore, the survey includes a third approach to measure only political attitudes and uses the self-reported political orientation to enrich the results and discussion process. 
       This third - and primary - approach to assess political attitudes utilizes two sets of statements about politics and society, where respondents indicate their level of agreement to each statement on a 5point-Likert scale (Brill, 2011) ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree. The first set comprises 5 statements about general society, derived from the Political Compass questionnaire (politicalcompass.org), which tests social attitudes with regards to individual engagement with the government or state i.e. predispositions towards libertarianism or authoritarianism. Testing socio-political rather than economic-political orientation was deemed more important, given the way in which socio-political identities in India have crystallised more around nationalistic lines. The second set comprises 8 statements about the current national political environment, with these statements being directly positioned against the narratives in the treatment messages. These statements are essential for the categorization of individuals based on their political attitudes, as it enables the testing against attitude-consistent and attitude-discrepant messages. The statements in this set range from self-identification with the national political parties (e.g. supporter of BJP, Congress or no party), opinions on these parties and their functioning (e.g. Congress as the best alternative to the BJ), and some factually oriented statements (e.g. Congress is left-leaning, BJP is right leaning).   
       Based on the responses to these two sets of statements, the categorical independent variable of political attitudes was created. The variable of political attitudes was then presented in three different ways, depending on the hypothesis that was being tested. Firstly, politically slanted attitudes were expressed with three categories: left, centre, and right. Secondly, politically extreme attitudes created to dichotomy of moderate attitudes and extreme attitudes. Thirdly, extreme politically slanted attitudes represent both politically slanted and politically extreme attitudes through five categories: extreme-left, left, centre, right, and extreme-right. 
        It should be noted, that similar levels of agreement to each statement do not reflect one political slant. Therefore, certain statements were reverse coded; however, this process will be explained in further detail in the sub-section on reliability and validity. 
3.3.2. Independent variable: frequent news consumers
The other categorical independent variable this study uses is of frequent news consumers, positing that habits of frequent news consumption leads to more accurate identification of fake news despite the individuals' political attitudes (Knobloch-Westerwick, et al., 2012). Frequent news consumption can be conceptualized in many ways depending on what is being measures. For the purpose of this study, it is kept in mind that questions need to be framed within the Indian context of information consumption. Firstly, the online news consumption habits of Indian are marked more by distributed discovery via various online channels rather than direct search for news. Secondly, disinformation proliferation in India is a rapid process, partly due to unverified sharing via ordinary internet users, who often become unwitting distributors due to certain news information by-passing the normal critical news engagement filters.  
       Therefore, frequent news consumers are identified in this survey through self-reported data from respondents, who are asked to indicate whether they consider themselves to be news consumers, whether they actively search for news, and whether they verify the news they engage with.  
3.3.3. Dependent variable: identification of fake news messages
The first dependent variable is concerned with the identification of fake news messages, which directly assesses whether respondents identify the presented news messages as 'fake' or 'real' news. This categorical variable is measured through the first question that is presented after exposure to each of the four treatment messages, which is "is this fake news" with the option of answering either with a 'yes' or 'no'. Previous studies into disinformation have presented a third option of 'maybe' or 'I do not know'; however, as this study treats identification as a dependent variable which is affected by other factors e.g. political attitudes, the researcher felt that compelling respondents to make a decision - even if they are not sure - would provide more significant insights into why they made their decision.   
       Though measured through the same question, there is a distinction drawn is how the dependent variable is understood, leading to the formulation of two dependent variable. In one case, the dependent variable is framed as the correct identification of fake news messages and is therefore, concerned with the accuracy with which respondents holding can distinguish fake news messages from real news messages. In the other case, the dependent variable is framed as perception of falsity of news messages and is more concerned with which news messages were identified as fake and real, rather than if they were correctly identified.
3.3.4. Dependent variable: usefulness of news messages
Apart from the context in which this study takes place, the time period in which it takes place is also of significance. As mentioned earlier, this study investigates (dis)information in the run-up to the national elections results. In these intensive time periods, political information assumes greater importance as they can become tools to deal with a potentially changing socio-political environment. Therefore, it would be interesting to delve into how useful the news messages are perceived to be by respondents, regardless of their falsity.
       Therefore, the categorical variable of usefulness of news messages is measured through the fourth question presented after exposure to each of the four treatment messages, which is "how useful is this information to you". Responses are then given on a 5-point Likert scale, ranging from extremely useful to extremely useless. 
3.3.5. Control Variables
This study also controls for demographic variables, by collecting demographic information that is not directly tested in the hypothesis but allows for the testing of any statistically significant variations in the variables along demographic lines. 
      Gender is framed as a categorical independent variable, which the answer groups of 'male', 'female', 'other' and 'rather not say'. Theory has not 
      Age is framed as a continuous independent variable, collected through a text-entry field where respondents are asked to indicate their birth year. The responses were then recoded to indicate their age, and further categorized into the age groups of below 25 years, 25 to 34 years, 35 to 44 years, 45 to 55 years, and 55 years and above. 
      Highest obtained educational level was a categorical independent variable, with the response categories studying up to grade 10th, up to grade 12th, up to a Bachelors/under-graduate degree, up to a Masters/post-graduate degree, up to a Ph.D/Doctorate degree, and an 'other' option. Current status of employment is 57.8% are employed - 35.1% in the private sector and 22.7% in government/public sector - and 2.9% are unemployed, and 1.2% are retired. Of the remaining, 32.2% are students and 5.8% chose the 'other' option (e.g. consulting, freelance work).
      Language of news consumption was a categorical independent variable, collected through two open entry fields where respondents must indicate the primary language in which they consume news and an optional response of indicating what secondary/other languages they consume news in. The survey gathered information regarding language as linguistic profiles are a more complex aspect of personal identity but can yield interesting results in this phenomenon. English is spoken by around 125 million (11% of the population), with almost all English speakers being bilingual and concentrated in urban areas (Nagarajan, 2018; www.censusindia.gov.in). Though only 227,000 consider it a first language (Kroulek, 2017), the number of people who use English for social communication and consume English-heavy content is much higher (Masani, 2012). These numbers assume importance because the discourse surrounding the disinformation crisis features most prominently in English language news, and English reading audiences are more aware and warier of disinformation than their regional language counterparts (Chakrabarti et al., 2018). Therefore, the survey will also gather details on languages in which news content is consumed as well as languages spoken.
      Finally, this study also accounts for whether treatment messages have been seen before. News message seen before is a categorical independent variable which asks respondents to indicate either with a 'yes' or 'no' whether they have encountered the presented news message before. This would be especially important for real news messages, whose correct identification could then be an offset of the respondent having seen the information before rather than their own decision-making process. 
3.3.6. Hypotheses Testing
H1a: Individuals are more likely to accurately identify disinformation when the message is incongruent with their political attitudes.
H1b: Individuals are less likely to perceive a message as disinformation when it is congruent with their political attitudes
To test Hypothesis 1a & 1b, the identification of fake news messages is tested against the politically slanted attitudes of the respondents by running a test of independence Chi-square. A Chi-square test was identified as the most appropriate test as it explores whether the two variables are related, with both tested variables being nominal in nature. While, both hypotheses are tested using the same variables and through the same test, there is a distinction drawn in the framing of the dependent variable. In the case of H1a, the dependent variable is the correct identification of fake news messages, and in the case of H1b, the dependent variable is perception of falsity of news messages.

H1c: Individuals are likely to perceive a message as 'real news' faster when it is congruent with their political attitudes.
       To test Hypothesis 1c, the speed of identification of news messages is tested against the politically slanted attitudes of the respondents by running a one-way ANOVA test. An ANOVA test was identified as the appropriate test as it explores whether there are any substantial differences between respondents with different political attitudes in how fast they identify a news message as 'fake' or 'real', and whether more decision-making time was expended on attitude-discrepant messages. This test also allows for the testing for a continuous dependent variable i.e. time. 

H2a: Right-leaning individuals are likely to find attitude-congruent messages more useful than attitude-discrepant messages.
H2b: Left-leaning individuals are likely to find attitude-discrepant messages more useful than attitude-congruent messages.
	To test H2a & 2b, the usefulness of news messages is tested against the politically slanted attitudes of the respondents by running a repeated measures ANOVA. In the case of H2a, only the right-leaning political attitude group is tested to assess whether there is a difference in which news messages are perceived as useful based on attitude-congruency and discrepancy. In the case of H2b, only the left-leaning political attitudes group is tested with the similar expectation that there is a difference in perceived usefulness of a message based on its attitude-congruency or discrepancy. 

H3: Individuals with moderate political attitudes are more likely to accurately identify disinformation messages than their more politically extreme counterparts.
       To test Hypothesis 3, the identification of fake news messages is tested against the politically extreme attitudes of the respondents by running a test of independence Chi-square Here, a distinction has been drawn in the formulation of dependent variable, where rather than looking at the which ideology it is slanted towards, we look at how extreme or moderate these attitudes are. 

H4a: Left-leaning individuals are more likely to accurately identify attitude-congruent disinformation than their right-leaning counterparts.
H4b: Extreme right-leaning individuals are less likely to identify attitude-congruent disinformation than their extreme left-leaning counterparts.
       To test Hypothesis 4a & 4b, the identification of fake news messages is tested against the politically slanted attitudes of the respondents by running a test of independence Chi-square. Here, only the 2 fake news messages will be tested against the group which has politically slanted attitudes which are congruent with the political slant of the message. This means that pro-left fake news messages will be tested against left-leaning politically slanted attitudes, and pro-right fake news messages will be tested against right-leaning politically slanted attitudes. In the case of H4b, a similar process will be followed to test the hypothesis, with the slight distinction of pro-left fake news messages being tested against extreme left-leaning politically slanted attitudes, and pro-right fake news messages tested against extreme right-leaning politically slanted attitudes

H5: Individuals who frequently consume news content are more likely to accurately identify disinformation.
       Finally, to test Hypothesis 5, the identification of fake news messages is tested against the frequent news consumers using a test of independence Chi-square. H5 follows the same process as the previous hypotheses using chi-square tests but against a new independent variable. 

3.4. Survey Design 
This section details the process through which the final survey constructed, and the steps taken to ensure that the design allowed for the correct measurement of every variable while not losing the focus and attention of the respondents due to the heavy nature of the topic. This iterative process was particularly important as the topic of political disinformation in India has not been researched in this capacity and therefore, many elements of this survey were created by the researcher for the purpose of this study. This section will detail the initial survey design - the elements of which were extrapolated from existing research and literature - and will explain the pre-test and pilot phase which led to the construction of the final survey. 
3.4.1. Initial survey construction
The initial survey design contained three blocks: preliminary information, treatment and post-test questions. The first block was to contain questions that collected demographic details and the political orientation of the respondent, the latter of which would be assessed through their self-identified political orientation. The second block would contain the treatment of news messages with left- or right-leaning political slants and would either be real or fake news. The final block would contain questions about news consumption habits and language history. The survey would conclude with a debriefing message presented at the end which would clearly state that the treatment messages were created for the purpose of this study and which messages were false. It was important that the survey would not take more than 10-15 minutes to fill out, as respondents need to complete the survey to receive the debriefing that prevents them from leaving the survey with any misinformation.
	The main question that arose during the construction of the initial survey design was in the measurement of an individual's political orientation. Firstly, it was decided that questions regarding political orientation would be presented after exposure to the treatment, thus shifting it to the last block instead of the first. This was done so that respondents would not draw a connection between the identification of fake news and their own political attitudes. If made to think about their political leanings and then exposure to the treatment could prime them in a way that potentially adds a critical filter in their assessment and subsequent engagement with the news messages. The goal was to expose them to the news messages in conditions where confounding variables could be minimized.
       Secondly, political orientations are the result of complex and multi-layered processes that - in India especially - cannot be identified and established in a generalized manner. Furthermore, major shifts in the political landscape in the past decade have led to a reimagining of what socio-political identities in India are, which cannot be broken to down to a one-dimensional left to right scale. Additionally, while this study is based more in the changed socio-political identification within the Indian population, that is not necessarily how every respondent would perceive or identify themselves. Therefore, it was deemed important to assess a respondent's political attitudes with regards to the definitions laid down within this study rather than solely rely on their self-identification. For this purpose, three approaches were identified to assess political attitudes through the survey. Multiple approaches were adopted as that would allow the researcher to get an in-depth look into the various facets of a respondent's socio-political identity and relate them appropriately to what the research studies. The validity of these approaches would then be gauged through the pre-test, which would allow the researcher to narrow-down on one approach to assess political orientation. 
3.4.2. Pre-test
The survey underwent a pre-test to assess and select the most appropriate news messages from a larger pool of stimuli, while the multiple approaches to gauge political orientation were also tested. The result of the pre-test would lead to the selection of the final treatment and inform the researcher which approach to assess political orientation was the best fit for this research. 
       For the pre-test of the treatment, 14 short textual news messages were created by the researcher, of which 9 were constructed as headlines and 9 as excerpts. There were 3 messages for each of the four conditions of fake right-leaning, fake left-leaning, real right-leaning and real left-leaning. An additional 2 politically neutral messages were also included, to assess whether the respondents could differentiate between politically slanted and neutral messages as conceptualised by the researcher. Each message was followed by three questions asking respondents to indicate whether they thought it was fake news, whether it is politically neutral, and whether they have seen this item before. 
       After being shown all 14 news messages, the respondents were asked to plot themselves on a grid which broke down political orientation into the two dimensions of economic and social attitudes. This political orientation grid has been derived from the political spectrum system, which posits that measurement of socio-political identities along a one-dimensional left to right scale does not fully encapsulate the complexities of an individual's profile (politicalcompass.org), thus leading to the creation of a two-dimensional measurement tool. In this grid, the x-axis measured economic attitudes: ranging from the economic left i.e. regulated or state-planned economy, to the economic right i.e. deregulated or free-market. The y-axis measured social attitudes: ranging from strong central power i.e. state more important than self at the top, to strong individual autonomy i.e. individual freedom more important than the state at the bottom. This created the four potential categorizations of libertarian-left, libertarian-right, authoritarian-left, authoritarian-right. For reference, the authoritarian-right represents the extreme-right and the libertarian-left represents the extreme-left. 
       While the grid provides a more multi-faceted and accurate method to measure political orientation, it is a complex exercise which takes more time and effort than some participants might want to expend on a survey. Therefore, in the instructions for the grid question, respondents were given the option of skipping to an alternative method to indicate their political orientation. The alternative method was the second approach, which was a simplified linear scale, with the options of left, centre-left, moderate/centre, centre-right, and right. 
       The final approach to measure political attitudes was a block of statements to which the respondents had to indicate their level of agreement, on a 5-point Likert-scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree. This block was broken down into three sets of statements: the first set comprising 6 statements about general society; the second with 5 statements about contemporary India; and the third with 8 statements on the current political environment in India. 
       The survey concluded with the final block, which consisted of one post-test question. Respondents were asked to rank the three approaches based on which one they thought was the best for them to express their political leanings. The ranking had to be in done in descending order of most preferable to least preferable.    
       There were no sample restrictions in the pre-test phase except that they must be resident Indians, so that the treatment message could be assessed appropriately and critically. The pre-test did not use the previously mentioned distribution channels; instead, it was distributed within the personal networks of the researcher who were not eligible to be in the sample of the final survey. The data collection period for the pre-test survey occurred between May 9th and 15th 2019, with a total of 56 recorded responses. Partial responses were omitted from this dataset, leaving 35 complete responses recorded between May 9th and 11th.
       Based on the results of the pre-test survey, one message was selected from the three presented per condition, leading to a final set of 4 treatment messages. The messages were selected based on how clearly the political slant - and which side it was slanted towards - was identified, and in the case of the real news messages, which messages had been seen by the least number of people. These 4 messages were also fine-tuned based on the feedback received from the pre-test respondents, where it was expressed that the language of certain messages could be modified to reflect which political side it was slanted towards more clearly. Only one message was selected per treatment condition as any number more than that would increase the length of the survey, which was not desirable. The two politically neutral messages were omitted from the final treatment set for the previously mentioned reason, and because most respondents were able to identify which messages had a political slant and which did not. 
	Regarding which approach was preferred for expressing political orientation, the post-test question revealed that respondents preferred the two-axis grid. This was also indicated by the number of low number of respondents' who skipped to the alternative simplified scale. This was unexpected as the grid was a complex format that required extra effort from the respondent; however, feedback collected from respondents revealed that though it required a little more thinking, many had not seen a grid of this nature and enjoyed plotting themselves on it. Similar feedback was also received from respondents who were in the sample of the final survey. 
       After the appropriate adjustments were made, the final survey was designed. Before the survey was circulated by the previously mentioned distribution channels, the respondents from the pre-test sample were re-approached to fill the final survey as part of the pilot phase. This pilot was guided by the aim of checking the general structure, flow and language of the survey, the clarity of questions and the amount of time taken to fill the survey. Based on the feedback from the pilot, some final technical and linguistic corrections were made.  

3.4.3. Final survey design	
The survey was constructed and administered in English through the online survey software Qualtrics and distributed through an online anonymous link. The survey itself comprises eight blocks: Introduction to the Study, Preliminary Demographic Information, Treatment, Fake News and Indian Media, Political Orientation, Society and Politics, News Consumption Habits, and the Debriefing. With the exception of the Introduction and Debriefing - which provide essential information regarding the research and survey - the remaining six are question blocks directly related to collecting data from respondents. 
       The first block of the survey is a single page/screen introduction which details the basic purpose of study as a Master thesis research at the Erasmus University Rotterdam, explaining the anonymous and academic nature of the data collection, and providing an overview of what to expect from the survey in terms of questions and structure. Instructions are also given to the respondent on how to move forward with the survey, while also establishing that respondents can withdraw consent of participation at any point during the survey. This page also offers the EUR student e-mail address as contact information; however, the name provided is a pseudonym. This decision was taken to afford a degree of anonymity to the researcher, who felt that her gender and non-Hindu name might make her susceptible to right-wing online trolling. Therefore, the name "M. Mathur" was provided, with the first name being shortened to an initial to keep the gender identity undefined and the last name belonging to a North Indian and upper caste community. 
	The second block collected preliminary demographic information from the respondents through four questions. The first question presented was an open text field to indicate year of birth, and the second question asked respondents to indicate their gender while also providing the option of rather not say in case they would like to keep it confidential. The remaining two questions gathered information about the highest educational qualifications and the current status of employment of the respondent. 
	The third block contains the treatment comprising the four news messages, one for each of the four treatment conditions. The two factually incorrect or fake news messages were "...was what you almost missed during his speech: Rahul Gandhi let slip a swear word while talking about the BJP administration." (pro-right/anti-left slant) and "Celebrated Nobel prize-winning Economist Amartya Sen snubs BJP, hints at possible future with Congress" (pro-left/anti-left slant). The two factually correct or real news messages were "​​​'Modi is a 'Champion of the Earth': first Indian PM to receive UN's highest environmental award for championing new levels of cooperation on environmental action" (pro-right/anti-left slant), and "​​​​​​... malfunctioning EVM machinery criticised by Opposition Parties, with reports coming in that glitches send votes directly to BJP candidates." (pro-right/anti-left slant). The messages were presented in a randomized order to respondents, by enabling the 'randomizer' function on Qualtrics. Randomization of this nature minimizes the chance that the order in which messages are presented affects the perception of whether it is fake news or not.   
	It should be noted that these messages were finally selected keeping certain considerations in mind, in addition to the factors mentioned in the previous section. Firstly, two messages were headlines and two were excerpts; this was done to ensure equal variation in the format of the news message. Secondly, and more importantly, which narratives were used for the real news and which ones for the fake news messages were chosen with care. The messages which directly refer to the Modi or BJP were chosen as the real news messages because the researcher felt that given the sensitivity that accompanies any critical discourse of the ruling party, it would be better to not present anything - whether for or against - that is factually incorrect, to protect the research from being considered biased and having 'invalid' results. Due to this reasoning, the two fake news messages have narratives that focus on Congress, as audiences have been observed as having less strong feelings about Congress as compared to the BJP. 
	 Each news message was followed by four questions. The first three questions were the same as in the pre-test: is this fake news; have you seen this news before; and is this news politically neutral. A fourth question was added, regarding how useful the information in this news message was for the respondent, to answer H2a & H2b. The first question, regarding identification as fake news, was presented in a separate page than the latter three, which were presented together in a following page. This was done to accurately measure the time it took to identify the falsity of a news message, to answer H1c. Both pages displayed the fake news message at the top.
	The fourth block consisted of two questions regarding the current news and media landscape in India. The first question asked respondents to choose what kinds of news content they considered to be fake news, providing the options of factually incorrect information, misleading information, information pushing a political agenda, and clickbait and/or sensational news. An 'other' option with an open text entry field was provided, in case respondents had additional conceptualization of what comprises fake news to them. Respondents could select multiple options as answers to this question. The second question in this block was a statement set regarding perceptions on the fake news crisis in India, its use for political propaganda, and perceived political biases in traditional news media. Respondents could indicate their level of agreement to these statements on a 5-point Likert-scale, ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree.  The statements in this question were taken from the two statement sets in the pre-test, about contemporary India and the national political landscape.  
	The fifth block consisted of two questions - of which respondents only had to answer one - regarding self-identified political orientation. The first option presented was of the previously described political orientation grid with two-axis indicating political and social attitudes. Respondents who found the grid to be too complex where presented with the alternative linear scale to express political orientation from left- to right-leaning. The sixth block consisted of two statement sets about society and politics to which respondents had to indicate their level of agreement on 5-point scale. This block was used to measure the political attitudes of respondents, in direct relation to the content of the treatment message. The first set had 5 statements about general society, and the second set had 8 questions focused on the current national political environment in India.  
	The sixth block has 7 questions regarding the news consumption habits of respondents. Three questions ask respondents to indicate how often they consider themselves to: be news consumer, actively search for news content, and double-check or verify the news content they consume. The answers to each question are presented as a 5 option frequency, ranging from never to always. One question asks respondents to indicate the types of news topics they consume, with the option to select multiple topics among 12 options. This block also contains to 5-point scaled questions on the source of news and the level of trust they have on the specific source. 7 sources - including but not limited to television, print and digital news, and word of mouth - are provided, asking respondents to indicate how often they get news from it. The following question asks respondents to indicate how trustworthy they find the same 7 sources on a scale from 1 to 5, where 1 indicates not at all trustworthy and 5 indicated completely trustworthy. The survey concludes with the question asking respondents to indicate the primary language in which they consume news content, with the option of indicating any secondary/other languages.
	After completing the survey, the respondent is presented with the debriefing message. This debriefing is essential for respondents to see - especially the ones who were exposed to the treatment - as it clarifies which news messages were real and which ones were fabricated. The contact details of the researcher were provided again, in case of any queries or feedback. Finally, three links for resources were provided for respondents to learn more about the fake news phenomena, see Appendix A.  
3.5. Reliability and validity
This section details the steps taken by the researcher to maximise reliability and validity with regards to operationalization of variables, measures selected, and the construction of appropriate scales to analyse the data and test the hypotheses. While it is not possible to achieve perfect reliability and validity, it is important that studies are constructed with accuracy and credibility in mind (Neuman, 2014). These aspects as especially important for this research, as most of the design was heavily contextualised from the work of other researchers or created by the researcher herself for this study.  
3.5.1. Validity 
Various steps were taken to ensure that the measurement of variables was as accurate and valid as possible. As mentioned earlier, the identification of socio-political identities, production of news in digital India, narratives in disinformation messages, conceptualizations of 'fake news' were derived from two comprehensive reports regarding the media and political landscape in India: BBC Beyond Fake News report (Chakrabarti, et al., 2018), and the Reuters Institute India Digital News Report (Aneez, et al., 2018). These reports informed how the concepts and questions from Western context-based research was applied to the current Indian environment. Furthermore, this research also highlighted the complexity and multi-faceted nature of political identities in India, especially in the way these identities have transformed in the past decade. Therefore, the use of multiple approaches to measure political attitudes and leanings was adopted to provide the researcher in-depth information about a respondents' socio-political identity. This allowed the researcher to select the most appropriate aspects or manifestations of these identities, which could then be accurately related to the narratives and political slants in the treatment news messages.   
       It is also recommended that multiple indicators are used to measure a single concept - especially if those concepts or variables are central to the study - as valid measurements should reveal that responses to the same concept are alike or converge (Neuman, 2014). This reasoning backs the previously mentioned example of using multiple approaches to measure political attitudes, but also provides backing for the use of multiple statements to measure the similar attitudes, for example, within a single approach. This is further exemplified in the next section regarding reliability of scales used. 
       Another important aspect of achieving validity was in limiting the impact of confounding variables, especially with regards to the new messages for the treatment. Firstly, the formulation of news messages was done in a way that minimized the effect any other factor apart from personal political attitudes could have on how an individual engages with the message. The most important aspect of this was in how the news message was visually presented. For example, it was decided that only the text would be presented without indicating the source, because research has indicated that source credibility - especially in terms of social cues like the person or news outlet - play a very important role in what news content is perceived as being real or fake. An additional concern regarding visual construction was that a news message presented as a screenshot of an article would increase the overall believability as actual news item; however, things like the background, font size, colour, and so on, could play a role in how 'professionally produced' a respondent would think the new item is. Therefore, it was decided that the news message would be presented as body of text, as that would increase the role the content of the message - rather than its visuals - would play in how respondents would engage with it. 
       
       
3.5.2. Reliability
As most of the scales in this survey were constructed by the researcher, it was essential that the reliability of its measurements was checked by conducting factor analyses and reliability checks. Tools for data collection are seen as being reliable when repetitions within the measurement process produce similar results (Neuman, 2014). Results from these checks could also reveal underlying dimensions within the dataset, which would then enrich the data analysis process. Prior to conducting factor analysis, the data that is being tested needs to fulfil the criteria of being a continuous variable and normally distributed, with each scale comprising a minimum of three items. These criteria were met by the two independent variables, and the results of the factor analyses and reliability checks are presented as follows. 
       Political attitudes: This variable was created using two sets of statements about general society and the current national political environment in India, both of which were measured through levels of agreement on a 5-point Likert-scale. 4 statements were taken from each of the general society and the national politics set, based on whether agreement or disagreement with them expressed left or right-leaning political attitudes.
       In the case of the general society statement set, 2 of the 4 selected statements had to be reverse coded so that low level of agreement reflected left-leaning attitudes and high level of agreement reflected right-leaning attitudes. Similarly, 2 of the 4 selected statements from the national politics set were reverse coded for the same purpose. These 8 items based on a 5-point Likert-scale, were entered into a factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (> 1.00), KMO = .73, χ2 (N = 242, 28) = 509.90, p < .001, revealing a model explaining 55.99% of variance. It was expected that all statements would load onto one factor; however, two of the statements - both regarding Congress - loaded onto a second factor. 
       Therefore, a new 6-item scale was constructed which excluded the two Congress related statements. A factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (> 1.00), KMO = .74, χ2 (N = 242, 15) = 335.802, p < .001, revealed a model explaining 44.35% of variance. Finally, a reliability check was conducted on both scales. This revealed that the 6-item scale had a Cronbach's α of .743, which proved to be slightly more reliable than the 8-item scale with a Cronbach's α of .739. Based on these results, the 6-item moderately reliable scale was chosen to formulate the independent variable of political attitudes
       Frequent news consumers: This variable was created using two items from the news consumption habits block of the survey: do you consider yourself to be a news consumer; and do you actively search for news content. Both these questions had a 5-option response category measuring frequency, ranging from never to always. Initially, a third item was also included i.e. do you double check or verify the news content you consume. However, a reliability check on these three items resulted in a Cronbach's α of .64. The deletion of the aforementioned third item increased the Cronbach's α to .72, which proved to be a moderately reliable scale.




4. Results and Analysis
This chapter begins with a section which provides relevant descriptive statistics regarding the independent variable of political attitudes, control variables, and some exploratory variables. The remaining sections provide the results of the statistical tests conducted and analysis of the statistically significant results, which are organized and presented according to the order of the 5 hypotheses sets. 
4.1. Descriptive statistics
4.1.1. Political attitudes versus political orientation
As detailed in the previous chapter, this survey adopted two main approaches to assess political leanings. The statement set approach, which was used to assess political attitudes in relation to the narratives of the treatment messages, was used to create the primary independent variable of political attitudes. The political orientation approach asked respondents to plot themselves on a two-axis socio-economic grid; however, this approach was not used to analyse data but rather to provide insights into the multi-faceted nature of political identities in India as well as highlighting the gap - if any - between self-reported and extrapolated/observed data. 
       Depending on the quadrant in which a respondent plots themselves, the political orientation grid leads to four potential categorizations of libertarian-left, libertarian-right, authoritarian-left, authoritarian-right. For reference, the authoritarian-right represents the extreme-right and the libertarian-left represents the extreme-left. Regarding political attitudes, the variable was formulated in three different ways depending on the hypothesis that was being tested. For the purpose of this comparison, the 5-category variable of extreme politically slanted attitudes will be used as it is the most comprehensive of the three formulations and is the most appropriate to compare to the political orientation grid. 
       As detailed in the sample characteristics section in the previous chapters and in Figure 1, the distribution of respondents between the 5 categories of political attitudes is not too disproportionate. This is especially noticeable when comparing the frequencies of the extreme-left (n=55), centrist/moderate (n=54), and extreme-right (n=56). Interestingly, it was noted that the greatest number of respondents were in the extreme right-leaning political attitudes category. 


Figure 1. Frequencies of extreme politically slanted attitudes
       However, looking at self-identified political orientation Figure 2, one can observe that the authoritarian-right (which is compared with the extreme right-leaning political attitudes) has the least number of points. In fact, there are more respondents who plotted themselves on the libertarian quadrants than on the authoritarian quadrants, thus indicating that more respondents identified with the (social) left than with the (social) right.

Figure 2. Heat map of the political orientation grid

	The major take-away from these two figures is that there seems to be a gap between socio-political identities and their manifestation in the form of political attitudes. The implications of this gap will be detailed in the following chapter. At this point, however, it can be said that the researcher's decision to test the hypotheses using political attitudes as an independent variable is given stronger confirmation.
4.1.1. Control variables
Keeping in mind that a multitude of factors can lead to the development of the political attitudes, this research also controls for demographic variables. The third formulation of the independent variable, extreme politically slanted attitudes, will be tested to see whether any statistically significant differences arise along demographic lines. The independent variable of frequent news consumers was also tested for demographic variations; however, all the results were statistically insignificant. 
	Age: The variable of extreme politically slanted attitudes was tested against the age groups of the respondents by running a Chi-square test of independence, which revealed that two variables are related: χ2 (N=238, 16) = 29.08, p = .023. Looking at the percentages, the clearest relation between age and political attitudes is seen with respondents aged between 25 and 34, and 55 and above. In both cases, there is a clear skew towards extreme political attitudes, with the 55 and above group tending more towards the extreme-right and 25-34 year olds tending towards the extreme-left. These results are in line with the general perception of extreme-right supporters being older and more conservative individuals, while extreme-left supporters are perceived more as young and liberal. However, looking at those below 25 also shows the highest percentage of respondents from that group with 24.7% holding right-wing attitudes. Though this goes against the previous assumption, it could also be symptomatic of the appeal of Modi and BJP to younger populations. This will be further explored in the concluding chapter.
Table 1.1 Crosstabulation of extreme politically slanted attitudes and age categories
Below 2525-3435-4445-5455 and aboveTotalExtreme-Left21.5%40.0%24.2%19.4%6.5%23.1%Left20.4%20.0%15.2%22.2%6.5%18.1%Centrist/Moderate23.7%20.0%24.2%16.7%19.4%21.4%Right9.7%13.3%18.2%13.9%25.8%14.3%Extreme-Right24.7%6.7%18.2%27.8%41.9%23.1%Total100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%      Political attitudes tested against the other demographic variables produced statistically insignificant results, which are reported as follows.
      A chi-square test revealed that gender is not related to extreme politically slanted attitudes: χ2 (N=242, 8) = 5.94, p = .654. This is not unexpected as previous research, though skewed towards male respondents, did not indicate that political attitudes vary significantly across different genders.
      A chi-square test revealed that education level is not related to extreme politically slanted attitudes: χ2 (N=242, 16) = 18.861, p = .276.
      A chi-square test revealed that status of employment is not related to extreme politically slanted attitudes: χ2 (N=242, 20) = 28.77, p = .092.
      A chi-square test revealed that primary language of news consumption is not related to extreme politically slanted attitudes: χ2 (N=242, 28) = 26.68, p = .536.
      Theoretically, there are expected variations in political attitudes across education, employment and linguistic lines; however, this sample was heavily skewed towards one category in each of the three variables i.e. college educated, employed or English news consuming respondents. Therefore, the statistically insignificant results are not unexpected given the characteristics of this sample, but these results cannot be used to make a generalized statement or assumption that internet using and/or English news consuming audiences do not differ in their political attitudes across demographic lines. 	
4.1.2. Exploratory variables
This study also collected information regarding respondents opinions about Indian news media landscape, the discourse surrounding fake news in India, and how it intersects with certain national politics. Though this data was not directly tested in any of the hypotheses, it was included in information collection to enrich the data analysis and discussion, as it could provide insights into overall trends within the sample. 
	News topics of National news and Politics and Governance received a high number of responses, accounting for 16% and 11.3% of responses. This is not surprising given that the survey was framed as being about the national politics, and was distributed in the last days running up to vote counting and national election results day. 
Table 2.1 Frequencies of news topics
ItemResponses NResponses PercentPercent of CasesLocal/regional1088.6%44.8%National20216.0%83.8%International17814.1%73.9%Politics and governance14311.3%59.3%Business and economy776.1%32.0%Sport and entertainment1159.1%47.7%Lifestyle and fashion786.2%32.4%Science and technology13510.7%56.0%Health and education12910.2%53.5%Arts and culture927.3%38.2%Other news topics40.3%1.7%No news10.1%0.4%Total1262100.0%523.7%





       
       Considering that this sample was drawn from internet using audiences, it was expected that digital news would be ranked as the most used source (m=4) amongst respondents. The low use of radio (m=1) and television (m=2) is also not surprising, given how radio is perceived as an obsolete source of news - especially amongst urban internet using audiences - and that platform-based, readily available online sources are overtaking television as a preferred source of news. 
Table 2.2 Descriptive statistics of sources of news information (N = 237)
ItemMinimumMaximumMeanStd. DeviationMedianTV1.005.002.451.172.00Radio1.005.001.390.641.00Print news1.005.003.041.213.00Digital news1.005.003.551.094.00Social media1.005.002.851.263.00Messaging apps1.005.002.061.042.00Word of mouth1.005.002.440.992.00       However, the frequency with which sources are used cannot be equated with how trustworthy respondents feel that source is. This can be seen with print news (M=3.32) being perceived as more trustworthy than digital news (M=3.15), which is not surprising given the importance that the print industry assumes as a core element on Indian media. Furthermore, print news - though still perceived as being biased (see Table 2.5) - still has a higher standard of news reporting than the low barrier entry digital news arena. 
	Online messaging applications such as Whatsapp - which was given as an example in the survey - has received the lowest trustworthiness score. Given the spate of mob-lynching violence that has taken place in the last 2 years due to rumour mongering through Whatsapp, as well as how central this messaging app has become in discussions about technology-enabled fake news, this score was expected. It should be noted that sharing news content through Whatsapp is seen more in terms of the forwards one receives within personal/professional networks in India, as compared to other countries where many established digital news outlets share versions of their news content through a message-based subscription.
Table 2.3 Descriptive statistics of trustworthiness of sources of news information (N = 237)
ItemMinimumMaximumMeanStd. DeviationTV1.005.002.72.99Radio1.005.002.881.01Print news1.005.003.32.95Digital news1.005.003.15.98Social media1.005.002.02.91Messaging apps1.005.001.51.75Word of mouth1.005.002.4.95
       Here, it is interesting to note that a higher number of responses were given to fake news being defined as misleading information than factually incorrect information, with 34.1% and 32.6% respectively. Though the difference is small, it could be an indication of how respondents are thinking about fake news more in relation to 'grey area' of news coverage seen in India right now, where new stories as being perceived as misleading the public due to selective or one-sided coverage. This would be in line with average response to the opinion statements indicating that news media in India is politically biased, and that traditional news media is more biased towards the BJP and Congress.
Table 2.4 Frequencies of types of fake news
ItemResponses 
NResponses PercentPercent of Cases56.1.1.1.1.2 Fake News is...factually incorrect information17532.6%72.3%misleading information18334.1%75.6%Information pushing a political agenda9818.2%40.5%Clickbait and/or sensational news7714.3%31.8%Other40.7%1.7%Total537100.0%221.9%
	The average response to the statement that India is facing a fake news crisis is of complete agreement, and similarly so for fake news being used for political propaganda. While these are widely accepted in academic discourse, there could be other reasons why the respondents felt this way. Firstly, this survey was framed as being about fake news in India and the elections, which maybe attracted respondents who were engaged in that discourse or at least believe this to be true. Secondly, as mentioned in previous chapters, English language media discourse has been leading the way in critical coverage given to the topic of disinformation and its proliferation across socio-economic and political lines in India. In general, this sample seems to feel that traditional news media is much more biased towards BJP (m=4) than the Congress (m=2). Perhaps these differ across different political attitudes; however, those tests were not run for this study. 
Table 2.5 Descriptive statistics of media and fake news opinions in India (N = 242)
ItemMinimumMaximumMedianStd. DeviationIndia is facing a fake news crisis.1.005.005.90News media in India is politically unbiased.1.005.0011.11Fake news is used as a tool for political propaganda.1.005.005.68Traditional news media (eg. news channels, national newspapers) are biased towards the BJP.1.005.0041.14Traditional news media (eg. news channels, national newspapers) are biased towards Congress.1.005.0021.07
4.2. Hypothesis 1
H1a: Individuals are more likely to accurately identify disinformation when the message is incongruent with their political attitudes.
H1b: Individuals are less likely to perceive a message as disinformation when it is congruent with their political attitudes
A test of independence chi-square was conducted on the four treatment conditions, of which tests only the two fake news conditions are analyzed for H1a, while all four are analyzed for H1b. The following are the results of the four chi-squares.
       A chi-square test revealed that politically slanted attitudes are related to identification of pro-right fake news messages: χ2 (N=242, 2) = 17.85, p < .001.
Table 3.1 Crosstabulation of fake pro-right message and politically slanted attitudes
LeftCentristRightTotalYes, fake75.5%63.0%45.6%61.2%No, real24.5%37.0%54.4%38.4%Total100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%
       A chi-square test revealed that politically slanted attitudes are not related to identification of pro-left fake news messages: χ2 (N=242, 2) = 1.43, p = .490.
       A chi-square test revealed that politically slanted attitudes are not related to identification of pro-right real news messages: χ2 (N=242, 2) = 3.92, p = .141.
       A chi-square test revealed that politically slanted attitudes are related to identification of pro-left real news messages: χ2 (N=242, 2) = 29.12, p < .001.
Table 3.2 Crosstabulation of real pro-left message and politically slanted attitudes
LeftCentristRightTotalYes, fake15.3%31.5%52.2%32.6%No, real84.7%68.5%47.8%67.4%Total100.0%100.0%100.0%100.0%       The first significant test condition is regarding correct identification of pro-right messages, and the crosstabulation shows left-leaning or incongruent attitude holders were the most accurate with 75.5% correctly identifying the messages, while only 45.6% of right-leaning or congruent attitude holders correctly identified the message as being fake. Therefore, H1a is partially accepted, as results have revealed that one of the two tested conditions are significant.
       Similarly, H1b is partially accepted as well because results have revealed that two of the four conditions are significant. The first condition that was significant was discussed earlier; however, it is interpreted differently here as we are not concerned with correct identification but rather the perception of falsity of news messages. We can see that with 54.4%, right-leaning attitude holders were least likely amongst the three groups to correctly identify the pro-right message as fake, while left-leaning were most likely to identify it as fake with 75.5%.
       The second significant result was for the real pro-left message. Here, a distinction arose between left and right-leaning attitude holders rather than just attitude-congruency and discrepancy. A larger number of right-leaning attitude holders perceived this message as being fake, with 52.2% identifying it as fake and 47.8% as real. Results have shown that the difference between responses of left-leaning attitude holders were greater, with 84% identifying it as real news and 15.3% as fake news.
H1c: Individuals are likely to perceive a message as 'real news' faster when it is congruent with their political attitudes.
       ANOVA revealed a significant main effect for politically slanted attitudes on the speed of identification of real pro-left news messages as real , F(2, 160) = 3.10, p = .048, partial η2 = .037. Turkey post-hoc comparisons revealed that participants holding left-leaning attitudes spent significantly less time identifying the pro-left news message as real (M = 15.03, SD = 3.90) than participants holding right-leaning attitudes (M = 31.54, SD = 5.41), p = .038. 
       ANOVA revealed no a significant main effect for politically slanted attitudes on the speed of identification of fake pro-right news messages as real , F(2, 90) = 1.10, p = .336, partial η2 = .025.  
       ANOVA revealed no a significant main effect for politically slanted attitudes on the speed of identification of fake pro-left news messages as real , F(2, 102) = 1.87, p = .159, partial η2 = .035.
       ANOVA revealed no a significant main effect for politically slanted attitudes on the speed of identification of real pro-right news messages as real , F(2, 100) = .73, p = 485, partial η2 = .014.
       Only one condition produced statistically significant results, that condition being the one with the real pro-left news message. This message is the most clearly identifiable anti-right among the four and is perhaps the most sensitive, as its content reflects real allegations from Opposition parties that electronic voting machine tampering was done by the BJP. Thus, it is expected that discrepant attitude holders took longer in identifying this message as real news, as this decision was potentially influenced by cognitive dissonance. Therefore, even though only one of the four conditions were significant, H1c is partially accepted. 

4.3. Hypothesis 2
H2a: Right-leaning individuals are likely to find attitude-congruent messages more useful than attitude-discrepant messages.
       Mauchly's Test of Sphericity indicated that the assumption of sphericity had been violated, χ2(5) = 21.07, p < .001. Therefore, degrees of freedom were corrected using Greenhouse-Geisser estimates of sphericity (ε= .88 for main effect of usefulness). The repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of usefulness to different politically slanted attitudes, F (2.65, 235.77) = 15.26, p < .001. Four significant differences were found with the Bonferroni Correction between politically slanted attitudes and whether messages were perceived as being useful. Therefore, H2a is partially accepted.
       Looking at the mean comparisons, it was expected that right-leaning attitude holders would find a pro-right message most useful (M=3.67, SD= 1.02) and a pro-left message the least useful (M=2.81, SD =1.27). However, it is interesting that one of the pro-left messages was perceived as being more useful (M=3.19, SD=.935) than a pro-right message (M=2.97, SD=1.17), and that the messages with the highest perceived usefulness are the two fake news messages. 

Table 4.1 Reports of Mean and Standard Deviation for usefulness of news messages
MSDFake Pro-right message3.671.02Fake Pro-left message3.19.935Real Pro-right message2.971.17Real Pro-left message2.811.27





H2b: Left-leaning individuals are likely to find attitude-discrepant messages more useful than attitude-congruent messages.
       Mauchly test for sphericity has been met for the main effects of likelihood to listen to the five hip hop songs from the survey, χ2(9) = 12.59, p = .182 The repeated measures ANOVA revealed a significant main effect on the likelihood to listen to differently filtered hip hop songs, F (3, 291) = 84.95, p < .001. Four significant differences were found with the Bonferroni Correction between politically slanted attitudes and whether messages were perceived as being useful. Therefore, H2b is accepted. 
       As expected, left-leaning attitude holders found both pro-right messages to be most useful, with the fake message being the most useful (M=4.17, SD= 1.02) and the real message become second most useful (M=3.39, SD =1.28). The pro-left messages were seen as being least useful, with the fake message being second least useful (M=3.17, SD=1.14) and the real message being least useful (M=2.12, SD=1.07) by quite a margin.
       It should be added that it is possible that the real pro-left message was considered the least useful and given a much lower score than the others because of the content of this message. The 2019 national election cycle would not be the first time that allegations or reports of voting machine tampering have been made against the BJP and perhaps left-leaning respondents perceived it as being 'old news' and not see it as 'new' useful information. 
Table 4.2 Reports of Mean and Standard Deviation for usefulness of news messages
MSDFake Pro-right message4.171.02Fake Pro-left message3.171.14Real Pro-right message3.391.28Real Pro-left message2.121.07




4.4. Hypothesis 3
H3: Individuals with moderate political attitudes are more likely to accurately identify disinformation messages than their more politically extreme counterparts.
       A chi-square test was run using the independent variable of extreme political attitudes to test each of the two fake news treatment messages, all of which yielded statistically insignificant results. Therefore, H3 is rejected. The reports for each test are as follows.
       A chi-square test revealed that politically extreme attitudes are not related to identification of pro-right fake news messages: χ2 (N=242, 1) = 1.33, p = .249.
       A chi-square test revealed that politically extreme attitudes are not related to identification of pro-left fake news messages: χ2 (N=242, 1) = 1.17, p = .279.
       The rejection of this hypothesis does not necessarily have to mean that extreme or moderate political attitudes do not influence how an individual engages with disinformation. It could potentially indicate that it is not just about how extreme attitudes are but rather which ideology they are oriented towards. However, this cannot be said based solely on these results; more evidence will be needed on political slant-specific hypotheses.
       
4.5. Hypothesis 4
H4a: Left-leaning individuals are more likely to accurately identify attitude-congruent disinformation than their right-leaning counterparts.
       A chi-square test revealed that politically slanted attitudes are related to identification of attitude-congruent fake news messages: χ2 (N=188, 1) = 4.633, p = .031. Looking at the Table 5.1, left-leaning attitude holders accurately identified the pro-left news message as being fake 61.2% of the time, and right-leaning attitude holders accurately identified pro-right news message as being fake 45.6% of the time. Therefore, H4a is accepted.

Table 5.1 Crosstabulation of attitude-congruent fake message and politically slanted attitudes
LeftRightTotalYes, fake61.2%45.6%53.7%No, real38.8%54.4%46.3%Total100.0%100.0%100.0%
H4b: Extreme right-leaning individuals are less likely to identify attitude-congruent disinformation than their extreme left-leaning counterparts.
       A chi-square test revealed that extreme politically slanted attitudes are related to identification of attitude-congruent fake news messages: χ2 (N=111, 1) = 4.00, p = .046. left-leaning attitude holders accurately identified the pro-left news message as being fake 61.2% of the time, and right-leaning attitude holders accurately identified pro-right news message as being fake 45.6% of the time. Therefore, H4b is accepted. 
       The acceptance of this hypothesis ties into the explanation provided previously for why H3 being rejected does not mean that there is no difference between moderate and extreme attitude holders, rather bringing up the possibility of which way these extreme attitudes are slanted playing a role. 
Table 5.2 Crosstabulation of attitude-congruent fake message and extreme politically slanted attitudes
Extreme-LeftExtreme-RightTotalYes, fake61.8%42.9%52.3%No38.2%57.1%47.7%Total100.0%100.0%100.0%


4.6. Hypothesis 5
H5: Individuals who are frequent news consumer are more likely to accurately identify disinformation.
       A chi-square test was run using the independent variable of frequent news consumer to test each of the four treatment messages, all of which yielded statistically insignificant results. Therefore, H5 is rejected. The reports for each test are as follows.
       A chi-square test revealed that frequent news consumers is not related to identification of pro-right fake news messages: χ2 (N=241, 2) = 1.71, p = .425.
       A chi-square test revealed that frequent news consumers is not related to identification of pro-left fake news messages: χ2 (N=241, 2) = 4.1, p = .129.
       A chi-square test revealed that frequent news consumers is not related to identification of pro-right real news messages: χ2 (N=241, 2) = 1.03, p = .597.
       A chi-square test revealed that frequent news consumers is not related to identification of pro-left real news messages: χ2 (N=241, 2) = 1.26, p = .534.
       Theoretically, this is unexpected as these results go against the theorizations from previous studies, which posited that frequent news consumption would override the need for confirmation bias and political attitude-congruency. However, these results are not unexpected as previous studies were not based in the India, which is also why this basic assumption was tested in the context of this study. The insignificance of the results affirms that political attitudes do play a stronger role than frequent news consumption habits in India. 

4.6. Hypotheses summary
The following hypotheses were accepted:
Hypothesis 2b: Left-leaning individuals are likely to find attitude-discrepant messages more useful than attitude-congruent messages.
Hypothesis 4a: Left-leaning individuals are more likely to accurately identify attitude-congruent disinformation than their right-leaning counterparts.
Hypothesis 4b: Extreme right-leaning individuals are less likely to identify attitude-congruent disinformation than their extreme left-leaning counterparts.
The following hypotheses were partially accepted:
Hypothesis 1a: Individuals are more likely to accurately identify disinformation when the message is incongruent with their political attitudes.
Hypothesis 1b: Individuals are less likely to perceive a message as disinformation when it is congruent with their political attitudes
Hypothesis 1c: Individuals are likely to perceive a message as 'real news' faster when it is congruent with their political attitudes.
Hypothesis 2a: Right-leaning individuals are likely to find attitude-congruent messages more useful than attitude-discrepant messages.
The following hypotheses were rejected:
Hypothesis 3: Individuals with moderate political attitudes are more likely to accurately identify disinformation messages than their more politically extreme counterparts.
Hypothesis 5: Individuals who frequently consume news content are more likely to accurately identify disinformation.
 

5. Conclusion
This chapter summarises the key results of the study and presents them in relation to the core concepts on which this research is based and how it answers the overarching research question. The major conclusions drawn from this study are presented, along with its implication given the theoretical and contextual background. It is discussed whether the aims of this research were met and if/how does it contribute to this field. The practical limitations of conducting this research are also explained. The ethical aspect of conducting an experiment into a sensitive topic such as political leanings and fake news during a high-intensive election period is also addressed, and the precautions taken during the study are detailed. Based on the conclusions drawn, the results are presented in relation to what it means for future research, and recommendations are provided based on the findings.
5.1. Discussion
The results of the statistical tests and subsequent analyses led to the partial or complete acceptance of all the hypotheses. Except for the rejected Hypothesis 3 and 5, the complete acceptance of H2b, H4a & H4b, and the partial acceptance of H1a, H1b, H1c & H2a has provided enough evidence to accept that political attitudes do play a significant role in how individuals engage with (dis)information messages in India. The rejection of Hypothesis 5 further strengthened these interpretations as frequent news consumption was not seen as a factor that could override political attitudes in how political (dis)information is engaged with. 
       The rejection of Hypothesis 3 indicated that there was no significant relationship between extreme/moderate attitudes and engagement (dis)information messages. However, this ties in with the acceptance of H4b, which indicates that it is not how extreme the attitudes are but rather which way these extreme attitudes are slanted. The partial acceptance of H1 and H2a also lends support to the interpretation that the experience of being presented with attitude-congruent or attitude-discrepant information is not the same across all political attitudes. Taking a wider view on this argument reveals that right-leaning individuals' engagement with information is governed more by the need to avoid cognitive dissonance and strive for confirmation bias when presented with attitude-discrepant message than their left-leaning counterparts. Extending this to disinformation, the stronger need for confirmation bias amongst right-leaning individuals has led to a weakening of critical filters that would otherwise aid identification of real from fake news; in other words, right-leaning individuals are more susceptible to believing disinformation than left-leaning individuals in India.  
       The previous chapter also briefly touched upon the gap between an individual's political attitudes and their self-expressed political orientations, wherein more respondents had identified themselves on the (social) left but an analysis of the political attitudes revealed that there were far more right-leaning attitude holding respondents than initially thought. This is a result of how the political attitudes were framed with regards to national parties and politicians - especially around BJP - and is line with theory that posited that socio-political identities have transformed and strengthened, especially in the cases of right-leaning identities. Previous studies have indicated a crystallization of socio-political identities around the figure of Narendra Modi; this could be an explanation of why there was a gap between socio-political orientation and attitudes, as the appeal of Modi and the BJP seem to have transcended ideological identities. Furthermore, the strong formulation of right identities around certain political figures or parties is not mirrored in the left, who are more loosely connected not by a shared ideology in their opposition to Modi and/or the BJP. This could be why the need for confirmation bias is not as strong amongst left-leaning individuals, as they do not experience as strong a cognitive dissonance when confronted with anti-left information, due to there not being the same level of personal investment or identification with the 'left' as is seen within the right. 
       The left being better at discerning fake from real news than the right also has a lot to do with the dominant discourses in media and what engagement with it means. Left-leaning individuals are also more likely to engage with attitude discrepant information i.e. right dominated discourses because this information is important considering the current political atmosphere in India. On the other hand, right-leaning individuals are not motivated by a compulsion to engage with opposing discourses as the socio-political atmosphere of the country supports their worldview. 
       The wide-reaching appeal of Modi and the BJP is particularly visible when looking at the age groups of people with right-leaning attitudes, with a largest number of 18 to 25-year olds in the study being extreme-right. This could be symptomatic of the role digital technologies have also played in the consolidation of political parties in India, as BJP is well-known for their extensive digital media strategies - in both the 2014 and 2019 elections - and Modi is also known for his tech savviness and is referred to as India's first social media Prime Minister. 
5.2. Implications of research
       Overall, the aims of the research have been met with regards to establishing a relationship between certain political attitudes and engagement with political information and identification of political disinformation. As expected, results revealed a distinction between how left-leaning and right-leaning engage with (dis)information. This research confirms what has been extensively spoken about in media discourses, but takes an academic approach at confirming them, backed by the appropriate theories and contextualization.
       This study is not novel in what it is trying to prove, as these ideas stemmed from critical media discourse in India right now. However, currently the wealth of academic research into this relationship is lacking and a study of this nature has not been conducted in the Indian context. This is not to say that no research has been conducted into the role of socio-political identities and the disinformation epidemic in India, especially keeping in mind the Beyond Fake News Report that informs a significant chunk of this research. As mentioned earlier, this qualitative report was attacked by right-wing groups who criticized the results of the study. By conducting experimental research, hopefully this study can provide results that cannot be contested on subjective grounds.

5.3. Limitations and future research
The primary limitations placed on the researcher in trying to execute a study of this nature are concerned with the scope of a master's thesis. Firstly, the topic of political (dis)information and political attitudes is extremely wide in its scope, and this research took one approach at assessing it. Though the results of this study are quite conclusive, they should not be viewed as the final word but rather as grounds to conduct further, more in-depth research using more resources than were available for a master's thesis. 
       There are certain limitations inherent in trying to conduct a research of this nature through an online platform, primarily that of its applicability to the Indian population. These results cannot be generalized to any section of the population except for the internet using, English speaking subset. However, this is also the subset that primarily engages with the English language news discourse, which is the 'elite' discourse that informs the intellectual underpinnings of socio-political media discourse. 
       Another limitation of conducting online surveys of this scale is the consideration of the duration of the survey, which needs to be at an ideal time period of 10 minutes (or less) so as to not lose the interest of respondent. This leads to making certain design decisions that prevent one from gathering as much data as would be ideal. Therefore, the researcher has some specific recommendations for future research. Firstly, if conducting a similar experimental research on disinformation, then a larger set of treatment stimuli should be considered. These messages should reflect as many different layers in socio-political thought as possible, in terms of political slants, specific party/politician slants, source indications, different narratives of content, varying degrees of 'fake' news, and so on. The more multi-faceted the treatment is, the easier it would be to establish a clear causal relationship free of confounding factors. Secondly, more information should be gathered to assess political attitudes and orientation and the data collected regarding news consumption habits - which can really inform how individuals engage with online disinformation - should be more comprehensive and in-depth. 
       Finally, this study collected a lot more data than was used in analysis. Future research could potentially use this dataset as a way of enriching or complimenting their own findings. This research was also conducted in the week before the 2019 General Elections results were announced, and data from that period could be beneficial for comparative studies. 

References

Ahmed, S. (2017). News media, movies, and anti-Muslim prejudice: investigating the role of social contact. Asian Journal of Communication, 27(5), 536-553.
Alam, A. (2017). India: Political experience of a multi ethnic nation-state. In H. C. Günther (Ed.). Ethnic and Religious Cohabitation and Conflict, p. 173-215, Nordhausen: Verlag Traugott Bautz GmbH.
Allcott, H., & Gentzkow, M. (2017). Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31(2), 211-236.
Aneez, A., Chattapadhyay, S., Parthasarathi, V., & Nielsen, R. K. (2017). Indian news media and the production of new in the age of social discovery. Oxford: Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism.
Aneez, Z., Neyazi, T. A., Kalogeropoulous, A., & Nielsen, R. K. (2018). Reuters Institute India Digital News Report. Oxford: Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism.
Augey, D., & Alcaraz, M. (2019). Digital information ecosystems: Smart press (Information systems, web and pervasive computing series). London: ISTE.
Babbie, E. R. (2014). The Basics of Social Research (6th edition). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, Cengage Learning.
Bajaj, S. G. (2017). The use of Twitter during the 2014 Indian General Elections: framing, agenda-setting, and the personalization of politics. Asian Survey, 57(2), 249-270.
Battaglia, M. (2011). Convenience Sampling. In P. J. Lavrakas (Ed.). Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods, p. 149-154, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Inc.
Bennett, W. L., & Iyengar, S. (2008). A new era of minimal effects? The changing foundations of political communication. Journal of Communication, 58, 707-731.
Benoit, W. L. (2007). Communication in Political Campaigns. Bern: Peter Lang.
Brannon, L. A., Tagler, M. J., & Eagly, A. E. (2007). The moderating role of attitude strength on selective exposure to information. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 611-617.
Brill, J. E. (2011). Likert Scale. In P. J. Lavrakas (Ed.). Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods, p. 809-819. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Inc. 
Carson, J. (2019, January 31). Fake news: What exactly is it - and how can you spot it? Telegraph UK. Retrieved from https://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/0/fake-news-exactly-has-really-had-influence/
Census of India 2011. (2011). Office of the Registrar General. Retrieved from http://censusindia.gov.in/2011Census/C-16_25062018_NEW.pdf
Chakrabarti, S., Stengel, L., & Solanki, S. (2018). Duty, Identity, Credibility: 'Fake News' and the ordinary citizen of India. BBC News. Retrieved from https://www.bbc.com/news/world
Chakravartty, P., & Roy, S. (2013). Media pluralism Redux: Towards new frameworks of comparative media studies "Beyond the West". Political Communication, 30(3), 349-370.
Chaturvedi, S. (2002). Process of othering in the case of India and Pakistan. Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie, 93(2), 149-159. 
Chowdhury, S. J. (2018, January 8). The new identity politics in India. Dhaka Tribune. Retrieved from https://www.dhakatribune.com/opinion/2018/01/08/new-identity-politics-india
Cobrapost Sting. (2018, 26 May). The Wire. Retrieved from https://thewire.in/media/cobrapost-sting-big-media-houses-say-yes-to-hindutva-blackmoney-paid-news.
Consuelo, M. (2015). Media and nationalism in India: Reflections on the Narendra Modi government. Asian Politics & Policy, 7(3), 502-505.
Edwards, L., & Ramamurthy, A. (2017). (In)credible India? A critical analysis of India's nation branding. Communication, Culture & Critique, 10, 322-343.
Festinger, L. (1962). A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. London: Tavistock.
Gerber, A. S., Huber, G. A., & Washington, E. (2010). Party affiliation, partisanship, and political beliefs: A field experiment. American Political Science Review, 104(4), 720-744.
Gupta, A. (2018, July 10). Blaming WhatsApp for deaths due to lynchings has shielded govt accountability. First Post. Retrieved from https://www.firstpost.com/tech/news-analysis/blaming-whatsapp-for-deaths-due-to-lynchings-has-shielded-govt-accountability-4703481.html
Gupta, N. (2019, February 1). Indian media fights fake news in run up to Lok Sabha elections. The World Association of Newspapers and News Publishers. Retrieved from https://blog.wan-ifra.org/2019/02/01/indian-media-fights-fake-news-in-run-up-to-lok-sabha-elections
Hallin, D. C., & Mancini, P. (2004). Comparing Media Systems: Three Models of Media and Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hallin, D. C., & Mancini, P. (Eds.) (2011). Comparing Media Systems Beyond the Western World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Holbert, R., Garrett, R., & Gleason, L. (2010). A new era of minimal effects? A response to Bennett and Iyengar. Journal of Communication, 60(1), 15-34.
IAMAI-Kantar IMRB. (2018). Internet in India 2017. Retrieved from https://cms.iamai.in/Content/ResearchPapers/15c3c84c-128a4ea9-9cf2-a50a6d18f21c.pdf
India and Misinformation. (2018) Storyful. Retrieved from https://storyful.com.
India Election Results: Modi and the B.J.P. Make History. (2019, 23 May). The New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/22/world/asia/india-election-results.html
Internet users in India to reach 627 million in 2019: Report. (2019, March 6). The Economic Times. Retrieved from https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/tech/internet/internet-users-in-india-to-reach-627-million-in-2019-report/articleshow/68288868.cms?from=mdr
Ireton, C., & Posetti, J. (2018). Journalism, 'Fake News' and Disinformation. UNESCO. Retrieved from https://en.unesco.org.
Kattarwala, N. H. (2018). The portrayal of Islam in the Indian mass media. London School of Economics. Retrieved from http://www.lse.ac.uk/media@lse/events/MeCCSA/pdf/papers/Kattarwala,%20H%20%20The%20Portrayal%20of%20Islam%20In%20The%20Indian%20Mass%20Media.pdf
Knobloch-Westerwick, S. (2015). Choice and Preference in Media Use: Advances in Selective Exposure Theory and research (Routledge Communication Series). New York: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., & Kleinman, S. B. (2012). Preelection selective exposure: Confirmation bias versus informational utility. Communication Research, 39(2), 170-193.
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., & Meng, J. (2009). Looking the Other Way: Selective Exposure to Attitude-Consistent and Counterattitudinal Political Information. Communication Research, 36(3), 426-448.
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., Mothes, C., Johnson, B. K., Westerwick, A., & Donsbach, W. (2015). Political online information searching in Germany and the United States: Conﬁrmation bias, source credibility, and attitude impacts. Journal of Communication Research, 65, 489-511.
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., Mothes, C. & Polavin, N. (2017). Confirmation bias, ingroup bias, and negativity bias in selective exposure to political information. Communication Research, 1-21.
Kroulek, A. (2017, January 27). Which countries have the most English speakers? K International. Retrieved from https://www.k-international.com/blog/countries-with-the-most-english-speakers/
Kumar, A. (2011). Mass media and Muslims in India: Representation or subversion. Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs, 31(1), 59-77.
Laser, D. M. J., Baum, M. A., Benkler, Y., Berinsky, A. J., Greenhill, K. M., Menczer, F., ... Zittrain, J. L. (2018). The science of fake news. Science, 359, 1094-1096.
Lavrakas, P. J. (2008). Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Inc.
Lazarsfeld, P. F., Berelson, B. R., & Gaudet, H. (1968). The people's choice: How the voter makes up his mind in a presidential campaign. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Lijphart, A. (1996). The puzzle of Indian democracy: A consociational interpretation. The American Political Science Review, 90(2), 258-268.
Lijphart, A. (1999). Patterns of Democracy: Governments Form and Performance in Thirty-Six Countries. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Lok Sabha elections 2019 | Modi govt to retain power at Centre, NDA likely to win 270 seats: Opinion poll. (2018, March 12). News Nation. Retrieved from https://www.newsnation.in/election/lok-sabha-election-2019/lok-sabha-elections-2019-modi-govt-to-retain-power-at-centre-nda-likely-to-win-270-seats-opinion-poll--article-216709.html
Manchanda, R. (2002). Militarised Hindu nationalism and the mass media: Shaping a Hindutva public discourse. South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies, 25(3), 301-320.
Masani, Z. (2012, November 27). English or Hinglish - Which will India choose? BBC News. Retrieved from https://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-20500312
McKeown, S., Haji, R., & Ferguson, N. (2016). Understanding Peace and Conflict Through Social Identity Theory. Switzerland: Springer.
Media Ecosystems: The Walls Fall Down. Media and Entertainment Report 2018. (2018). KPMG. Retrieved from https://assets.kpmg/content/dam/kpmg/in/pdf/2018/09/ Media-ecosystems-The-walls-fall-down.pdf
Mistry, M. B. (2005). Muslims in India: A demographic and socio-economic profile. Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs, 25(3), 399-422.
Mullainathan, S., & Washington, E. (2006). Sticking with your vote: Cognitive dissonance and political attitudes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, American Economic Association, 1(1), 86-111.
Mushtaq, S., & Baig, F. (2016). Indian Media System: An Application of Comparative Media Approach. South Asian Studies, 31, 45-63.
Mutz, D. C., & Martin, P. S. (2001). Facilitating communication across lines of political difference: The role of mass media. American Political Science Review, 95, 97-114.
Nagarajan, R. (2018, November 7). 52% of India's urban youth are now bilingual, 18% speak three languages. The Times of India. Retrieved from https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/52-of-indias-urban-youth-are-now-bilingual-18-speak-three-languages/articleshow/66530958.cms
Neuman, W. L. (2014). Experimental Research. In W. L. Neuman (Ed.). Social Research Methods: Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches (7th Ed.), p. 281-313, Essex: Pearson.
Olsen, R. (2011). Self-selection bias. In P. J. Lavrakas (Ed.). Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods, p. 809-818. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Inc.
Pal, J. (2015). Banalities turned viral: Narendra Modi and the political tweet. Television & New Media, 16(4), 378-387.
Perrigo, B. (2019, January 25). How volunteers for India's ruling party are using WhatsApp to fuel fake news ahead of elections. Time. Retrieved from http://time.com/5512032/whatsapp-india-election-2019/
Rao, S., & Johal, N. S. (2006). Ethics and news making in the changing Indian mediascape. Journal of Mass Media Ethics: Exploring Questions of Media Morality, 21(4), 286-303.
Re-imagining India's M&E Sector. (2018). EY-India. Retrieved from https://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/ey-re-imaginingindias-me-sector-march-2018/%24File/ey-re-imagining-indiasme-sector-march-2018.pdf
Ryan, T. (2007). Modern Experimental Design. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Interscience.
Sarkar, G. (2018, November 23). Why the BBC owes a real apology to The Better India. Newslaundry. Retrieved from https://www.newslaundry.com/2018/11/23/bbc-non-apology-the-better-india
Shanker, P. (2018). Combating fake news in India. Stanford Social Innovation Review, 3, 7.
Sterba, S. K., & Foster, E. M. (2011). Self-selected sample. In P. J. Lavrakas (Ed.). Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods, p. 807-808, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Inc. Retrieved from http://methods.sagepub.com/base/download/ReferenceEntry/encyclopedia-of-survey-research-methods/n526.xml
Stroud, N. J. (2010). Polarization and partisan selective exposure. Journal of Communication, 60, 556-576.
Stroud, N. J. (2017). Selective exposure theories. In K. Kenski & K. Jamieson (Eds.). The Oxford Handbook of Political Communication, p. 531-540, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tajfel, H. (1982). Social Identity and Intergroup Relations (European Studies in Social Psychology). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tripathi, S. (2005). Less saffron, more spice. Far Eastern Economic Review, 168(8), 24-27.
Tucker, J. A., Guess, A., Barbera, P., Vaccari, C., Siegel, A., Sanovich, S., Stukal, D., & Nyhan, B. (2018). Social media, political polarization, and political disinformation: A review of the scientific literature. Social Science Research Network. Retrieved from https://ssrn.com/abstract=3144139
Tufekci, Z. (2018, January 16). It's the (democracy-poisoning) golden age of free speech. Wired. Retrieved from https://www.wired.com/story/free-speech-issue-tech-turmoil-new-censorship/?CNDID=50121752
Uikey, S., & Dubey, N. (2018). Mob lynching in India: Whatsapp as social media to 'anti' social media. International Journal of Humanities and Social Science, 4(5), 35-40.
Van Duyn, E., & Collier, J. (2019). Priming and fake news: The effects of elite discourse on evaluations of News Media. Mass Communication and Society, 22(1), 29-48.
World press freedom index 2019. (2019). Reporters Without Borders. Retrieved from https://rsf.org/en/ranking
Wu, J. & Gettleman, J. (2019, May 22). India Election 2019: A simple guide to the world's largest vote. The New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/world/asia/india-election.html


56.1.1.1.2 Appendix A: Survey Questionnaire

1. INTRODUCTION

Thank you for participating in this survey about fake news in India!   
This survey is part of a Master's Thesis research project at the Erasmus University Rotterdam, Netherlands.

During the survey, you will be shown very short quotes from online articles and asked to indicate whether you think they are fake news. You will also be asked to share your opinions on some statements about politics and society. As there are no "correct" or "incorrect" responses, we request you to answer truthfully and to the best of your knowledge. 
  
Please note: 
* It will not take longer than 10 minutes to complete this survey. 
* This survey is anonymous. Therefore, the information you share will remain confidential and will only be used for academic research purposes. 
* You are free to leave the survey at any point (however, incomplete responses will be excluded from the data). 
* By clicking the arrow below, you are consenting to participate in this survey.   

If you have any questions or would like further information on this project, 
you can contact M. Mathur at 482427sm@eur.nl.  


2. DEMOGRAPHICS

Q2.1 In which year were you born?
_________________

Q2.2 What is your gender?
o Male
o Female
o Other
o Rather not say 

Q2.3 What is the highest level of education you have obtained? 
Note: if you are currently a student, you can indicate your ongoing study programme as the highest level.
o Primary education (upto class 8th)
o Secondary Education (upto class 12th)
o Undergraduate/Bachelor's Degree
o Postgraduate/Master's Degree
o Ph.D/Doctorate Degree
o Other ________________________

Q2.4 What is your current status of employment? 
o Student
o Unemployed
o Employed: government/public sector
o Employed: private sector
o Retired
o Other _________________________


3. Treatment:
You will now be shown 4 randomly selected quotes from online news articles.   
After each quote, you will be asked 4 short questions based on what was shown.  
There are no "correct" or "incorrect" responses, as we are interested in your opinions.   
Therefore, we urge you not to do an online search of the presented information during the survey, and to answer truthfully and to the best of your knowledge.

[Q4. Fake Pro-right news message]
"...was what you almost missed during his speech: Rahul Gandhi let slip a swear word while talking about the BJP administration."
Q4.1 Is this fake news?
o Yes
o No 


"...was what you almost missed during his speech: Rahul Gandhi let slip a swear word while talking about the BJP administration."
Q4.2 Have you seen this news before?
o Yes
o No 

Q4.3 Is this news politically neutral?   
Note: Here, 'neutral' means neither favouring nor opposing any political agenda, party or politician. 
o No, it is politically slanted in favour of the left (and/or against the right)
o Yes, it is politically neutral
o No, it is politically slanted in favour of the right (and/or against the left)

Q4.4 How useful is the information in this news to you?
o Extremely useful
o Moderately useful
o Neither useful nor useless
o Moderately useless
o Extremely useless

[Q5. Fake Pro-left news message]
"Celebrated Nobel prize-winning Economist Amartya Sen snubs BJP, hints at possible future with Congress"
Q5.1 Is this fake news?
o Yes
o No 


"Celebrated Nobel prize-winning Economist Amartya Sen snubs BJP, hints at possible future with Congress"
Q5.2 Have you seen this news before?
o Yes
o No 

Q5.3 Is this news politically neutral?   
Note: Here, 'neutral' means neither favouring nor opposing any political agenda, party or politician. 
o No, it is politically slanted in favour of the left (and/or against the right)
o Yes, it is politically neutral
o No, it is politically slanted in favour of the right (and/or against the left)

Q5.4 How useful is the information in this news to you?
o Extremely useful
o Moderately useful
o Neither useful nor useless
o Moderately useless
o Extremely useless

[Q6. Real Pro-Right news message]
"​​​Modi is a 'Champion of the Earth': first Indian PM to receive UN's highest environmental award for championing new levels of cooperation on environmental action"
Q6.1. Is this fake news?
o Yes
o No 


"​​​Modi is a 'Champion of the Earth': first Indian PM to receive UN's highest environmental award for championing new levels of cooperation on environmental action"
Q6.2 Have you seen this news before?
o Yes
o No 

Q6.3 Is this news politically neutral?   
Note: Here, 'neutral' means neither favouring nor opposing any political agenda, party or politician. 
o No, it is politically slanted in favour of the left (and/or against the right)
o Yes, it is politically neutral
o No, it is politically slanted in favour of the right (and/or against the left)

Q6.4 How useful is the information in this news to you?
o Extremely useful
o Moderately useful
o Neither useful nor useless
o Moderately useless
o Extremely useless

[Q7. Real Pro-left news message]
"​​​​​​... malfunctioning EVM machinery criticised by Opposition Parties, with reports coming in that glitches send votes directly to BJP candidates."


Q7.1 Is this fake news?
o Yes
o No 


"​​​​​​... malfunctioning EVM machinery criticised by Opposition Parties, with reports coming in that glitches send votes directly to BJP candidates."
Q7.2 Have you seen this news before?
o Yes
o No 

Q7.3 Is this news politically neutral?   
Note: Here, 'neutral' means neither favouring nor opposing any political agenda, party or politician. 
o No, it is politically slanted in favour of the left (and/or against the right)
o Yes, it is politically neutral
o No, it is politically slanted in favour of the right (and/or against the left)

Q7.4 How useful is the information in this news to you?
o Extremely useful
o Moderately useful
o Neither useful nor useless
o Moderately useless
o Extremely useless

4. Fake News and Indian Media
You will now be presented with questions regarding the media and news in India.

Q8.1 What do you consider to be 'fake news'?  
[select all options that apply]
o Factually incorrect information
o Misleading information
o Information pushing a political agenda
o Clickbait and/or sensational news
o Other ______________________

Q8.2 Please indicate your level of agreement to each statement by choosing one of the following options:
Note: we urge you to avoid using the 'neither agree nor disagree' option as much as possible.  

Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagreeNeither agree nor disagreeSomewhat agreeStrongly agree (5)India is facing a fake news crisis.o o o o o News media in India is politically unbiased. o o o o o Fake news is used as a tool for political propaganda.o o o o o Traditional news media (eg. news channels, national newspapers) are biased towards the BJP.o o o o o Traditional news media (eg. news channels, national newspapers) are biased towards Congress.o o o o o 


5. Political Orientation
Q9.1 The following is a grid which uses two dimensions to measure political orientation.  
The x-axis/horizontal line measures economic attitudes: ranging from the economic-left (i.e. regulated or state-planned), to the economic-right (i.e. deregulated or free-market).  
The y-axis/vertical line measures social attitudes: ranging from strong central power (i.e. state more important than self) at the top, to strong individual autonomy (i.e. individual freedom more important than the state) at the bottom.  
Please click your cursor/tap your finger to drop a point on the coloured grid which you feel best represents your current political orientation.
[single click/tap=drop point, double click/tap=remove point]
Note: if you feel this grid is too complex, click only the button at the bottom of the screen. You can then indicate your political orientation on a simplified scale, ranging from left to right-leaning.


Q9.2 Please indicate your current political orientation on the following scale:
o Left
o Centre-left
o Centre/Moderate 
o Centre-right
o Right 
6. Society and Politics
You will now be presented with statements regarding society and politics.

Q10.1 Please indicate your level of agreement with the following statements about general society:   
Note: we urge you to avoid using the 'neither agree nor disagree' option as much as possible.  

Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagreeNeither agree nor disagreeSomewhat agreeStrongly agree (5)No one chooses their country of birth, so it is foolish to be proud of it. o o o o o All authority should be questioned. o o o o o Making peace with the establishment is an important aspect of maturity. o o o o o Societal harmony is more important than economic growth. o o o o o I will always support my country, whether it is right or wrong.o o o o o 
Q10.2 Please indicate your level of agreement with the following statements regarding your opinions on the current national political environment:  
Note: In the following statements, 'BJP' refers to the Bharatiya Janata Party, 'Congress' refers to the Indian National Congress party, and 'Modi' refers to PM Narendra Modi.

Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagreeNeither agree nor disagreeSomewhat agreeStrongly agree (5)I am a supporter of the BJP. o o o o o I am a supporter of Congress. o o o o o I do not support any political party.o o o o o In the past 5 years, the BJP has done more good for the country than bad. o o o o o I feel Congress is the best alternative to the BJP to form the national government.o o o o o I feel that Congress is a left-wing party.o o o o o I feel that the BJP is a right-wing party.o o o o o I feel that Modi and the BJP have become synonymous.o o o o o 

7. News Consumption Habits:  
You will now be presented with some questions regarding your news consumption habits.

Q11.1 Do you consider yourself to be a news consumer?
o Never
o Sometimes
o About half the time
o Most of the time
o Always

Q11.2 What kind of news topics do you consume? [select all options that apply]
o Local/Regional news
o National news
o International news
o Politics and Governance
o Business and Economy 
o Sports and Entertainment
o Lifestyle and Fashion
o Science and Technology
o Health and Education
o Arts and Culture
o Other _____________________
o None

Q11.3 Do you actively search for news content?
o Never
o Sometimes
o About half the time
o Most of the time
o Always

Q11.4 Do you double-check or verify the news content you consume?
o Never
o Sometimes
o About half the time
o Most of the time
o Always


Q11.5 How often do you get news from the following sources?
Never (1)SometimesAbout half the timeMost of the timeAlways (5)Televisiono o o o o Radioo o o o o Print news (newspapers, magazines, etc.)o o o o o Digital news (e-newspapers, apps, etc.) o o o o o Social media platforms (Facebook, Twitter, etc.)o o o o o Online messenging platforms (Whatsapp, etc.)o o o o o Word of mouth (friends, family, etc.) o o o o o 

Q11.6 How trustworthy do you find the news from these sources? 
Note: 1=not at all trustworthy, 5=completely trustworthy
12345Televisiono o o o o Radioo o o o o Print news (newspapers, magazines, etc.)o o o o o Digital news (e-newspapers, apps, etc.)o o o o o Social media platforms (Facebook, Twitter, etc.)o o o o o Online messenging platforms (Whatsapp, etc.)o o o o o Word of mouth (friends, family, etc.)o o o o o 

Q11.7 In which language(s) do you consume news?
o Primary language ____________________
o Secondary/other language (optional) _____________________

8. Debriefing
YOUR RESPONSE HAS BEEN RECORDED
Thank you for participating!
 
 - PLEASE READ THE DEBRIEFING -
During the survey you were presented with both real and fake news quotes. To ensure that you do not leave this survey with misinformation, please read the following clarification:

Fake news quotes:
1. "...was what you almost missed during his speech: Rahul Gandhi let slip a swear word while talking about the BJP administration."
2. "Celebrated Nobel prize-winning Economist Amartya Sen snubs BJP; hints at possible future with Congress"
Real news quotes:
1. "​​​'Modi is a 'Champion of the Earth'; first Indian PM to receive UN's highest environmental award for championing new levels of cooperation on environmental action"
2. "​​​​​​... malfunctioning EVM machinery criticised by Opposition Parties, with reports coming in that glitches send votes directly to BJP candidates."
If you have any questions or would like to know more about this research project, please contact M. Mathur at 482427sm@eur.nl.
_
 
For more information on fake news, check out the following resources:
* Top 5 Questions about Media Literacy and Fake News
* AltNews (Indian non-partisan fact-checking website)
* Duty, Identity, Credibility: 'Fake news' and the ordinary citizen in India (BBC News Report: 'Beyond Fake News' Series)

56.1.1.2 APPENDIX B: Pre-test treatment messages

Factually incorrect information
(fake news)Factually correct information
(real news)Pro-right
(or anti-left)"...was what you almost missed during his rally speech: Rahul Gandhi used an abuse while talking about the BJP administration."
"​​​'Champions of the Earth': Modi receives UN's highest environmental award for championing new levels of cooperation on environmental action""... granted bail on health grounds, BJP candidate Sadhvi Pragya has been acquitted of Malegaon blast terror charges"
​​​​​​"Congress IT cell head tweets photoshopped image drawing a parallel between PM Modi and Hitler""Give me 42 seats and I will show you how to make the Hindus cry: Mamata Banerjee"
"With the Indian economy growing at a faster rate under the BJP Government..."Pro-left
(or anti-right)​​"... in a statement, Yogi Adityanath asserts that former Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar 'died of cancer because he allowed beef consumption in the state'."
"50 Lakh People Lost Jobs Since Demonetisation in 2016, According to Azim Premji University Report""BJP MLA booked after video uncovered of dalit youth being beaten up""​​​​​​...malfunctioning EVM machinery under fire from Opposition Parties, with cases of glitches leading to votes for the BJP candidates."
"Nobel-winning Economist Amartya Sen hints at possible future with Congress""Mayawati appeals to BSP-SP alliance workers in Amethi, Rae Bareli to vote for Congress"
Neutral

-"Lok Sabha elections 2019: 33% nominees from main parties have only finished school"
​​​​​"India's Anti-Satellite Missile Test Leaves World Divided, NASA unhappy"







Do they Discover Weekly your taste?
The differences between heavy and light
users of Spotify



	


Student Name:	Katarzyna Derwinis
Student Number:	507322

Supervisor: 		Dr. Joao Ferreira Goncalves


Master Media Studies - Media & Creative Industries
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication
Erasmus University Rotterdam


Master's Thesis 
June 2020



Do they Discover Weekly your taste? 

ABSTRACT

The expansion of the streaming services and new media has led to overwhelming catalogues of content available online. One of the most popular music streaming platforms that offers a broad collection of music on demand is Spotify. To facilitate the music discovery, this service provides its users with algorithmically created Discover Weekly playlist, that allows exploring new content every Monday morning. Moreover, these algorithmically created recommendations have a significant potential to facilitate discovering of new music that users are not familiar with. However, recommendation systems are also perceived to decrease diversity as they keep users in filter bubbles and echo chambers, where they are exposed to similar content. How users of the service perceive the diversity of their music content may be dependent on characteristics as subscription model or the quantity of music consumed daily. As People that spend more time on exploring the Internet and new technologies are perceived to be heavy users. In contrary, when they are less active online, they can be categorized as the light users. This assumption was used concerning music listening through the streaming platform, Spotify. Therefore, this thesis aims to analyse whether the differences in Spotify usage have an impact on the perceptions of the algorithmically created playlist, Discover Weekly. Thus, the research question was asked: to what extent does the diversity of the music recommended by the Discover Weekly playlists differ between heavy and light users of Spotify? To answer the main research question six hypotheses regarding music diversity, algorithmic recommendations and algorithmic satisfaction were stated. To be able to measure the differences between heavy and light users, the quantitative surveys were conducted. With the use of gathered data from 359 Spotify users, the outcomes were examined with the use of statistical tests and the SPSS software. The analysis indicated that there are no significant differences between heavy and light users when considering self-reported use, thus all hypotheses were rejected. However, the examination of the results indicated differences regarding perceptions of being heavy or light users. The more people perceive themselves as heavy users, the more diverse they perceive their content to be, the more they appreciate algorithmic recommendations, and the more satisfied they are with Discover Weekly.

KEYWORDS: Discover Weekly, Spotify, Music Diversity, Algorithms Appreciation, Algorithmic Satisfaction,
57 Table of Contents
Chapter 1. Introduction	5
Chapter 2. Theoretical Framework	9
2.1. The music streaming services	9
2.1.2. Discovering new music	11
2.2. Users of Spotify	12
2.2.1. Heavy Users & Light Users of Music Streaming Services	13
2.3. The role of the Recommendation Systems	14
2.3.1. The impact of personalized recommendations on users	15
2.4. Perceptions of Algorithms for Music Discovery	16
2.4.1. Algorithmic Aversion and Appreciation	17
2.4.2. Algorithmic Satisfaction	18
Chapter 3. Methodology	20
3.1. Choice of method	20
3.2. Sampling	21
3.2.1. Sampling Method	22
3.2.2. Sample	23
3.3. Operationalisation	24
3.3.1. Users of Spotify as the Independent variable	24
3.3.2. Dependent Variables	26
3.3.3. Additional variables	33
3.4. Validity and Reliability	34
Chapter 4. Results	36
4.1. Hypotheses Testing	36
4.1.1. Hypothesis 1	36
4.1.2. Hypothesis 2 and Hypothesis 3	37
4.1.3. Hypothesis 4	39
4.1.4. Hypothesis 5	41
4.1.5. Hypothesis 6	42
Chapter 5. Discussion And Conclusions	44
5.1. Discussion	44
5.1.1. Music Diversity	44
5.1.2. Algorithmic Appreciation	46
5.1.3. Algorithmic Satisfaction	47
5.2. Conclusions	48
5.3. Limitations	49
5.4. Future research	50
References:	52
Appendix A. Survey	58





58 Chapter 1. Introduction 

With the development of music streaming services, new possibilities to listen and discover music have arisen. These days, users can constantly stream content without the need to pay for each item separately, as it was in the case of physical albums. Now, subscriptions to the music platforms provide customers with access to almost endless catalogues of audio files (Morris & Powers, 2015). The variety of content available to the users on those services shifted the manner, in which people consume new music items. Accordingly, to Morris and Powers "streaming services have also eagerly promoted a vision of the future where streaming provides a totalizing 'musical atmosphere' to satisfy any musical need at any moment" (2015, p. 109). In contrast as Kunaver and Požrl (2017) stated, access to such a broad offer of music might be problematic to manage for the users. They may find difficulties in discovering interesting pieces in a short time, which makes the process of listening to music more complicated. Therefore, music streaming platforms constantly develop their services to make them more tailored to the customers' needs and to make exploring music easier. 
      Music platforms provide their users with interactive tools, for instance, to create playlists and share them with the world, or to follow already created compilations of songs to discover new content. Kamehkhosh, Bonnin and Jannach (2018) argued that while consumers use these tools to expand their music libraries, it is still time-consuming and quite complicated to discover new music due to the amount of available content. Thus, a common practise by music services is to implement recommender systems. The recommender systems are known as the tools that select and suggest content to the users (Ricci, Rokach & Shapira, 2010). Their form can vary depending on the needs of the service, however, most of them focus on increasing sales and providing a diversity of items by understanding the customers' needs. Thus, the recommender systems use gathered data about users and their preferences towards e.g. products or services and use them to select the most suitable offer for the consumers (Ricci et al., 2010). 
      The customers, on the other hand, are distinguished by a few characteristics that influence their music listening. Aspects like the subscription model, the quantity of music consumed daily or methods to discover the music, shape the way in which people are exploring diverse content. With the premium subscription, users are allowed to explore music catalogues without any limitations. Freemium users, however, receive music with a lower quality of sound and are interrupted with advertisements during the listening (Aguiar, 2017; Waelbroeck, 2013). In addition, overall Internet usage has an impact on music exploration and listening. Thus, the quantity of time spent on listening to Spotify might have an influence on discovering new content and overall music diversity (Tepper & Hargittai, 2009). Therefore, by analysing the differences between particular groups of users might be relevant as they differ in music exploration and might perceive the diversity of their content differently. 
      The online platforms expand their algorithms and recommender systems to provide users with the most suitable and tailored content for them. Moreover, these algorithmically created recommendations have a significant prospective to facilitate discovering of new content that users of the platform are not familiar with (Hosanagar, Fleder, Lee, & Buja, 2013). Thus, this phenomenon brought many different opinions regarding the diversity of content recommended by algorithms. Scholars argue that recommender systems close people in 'echo chambers', where they receive similar content that matches their preferences, or that they obtain algorithmically created suggestions that they will likely agree with, known as the 'filter bubbles' (Möller, Trilling, Helberger, & van Es, 2018; Flaxman, Goel, & Rao, 2016). On the other hand, researchers argue that tailored recommendations positively impact diversity, as the algorithms present users with new content (Hosanagar, et al., 2013). Thus, by exploring whether algorithmically created recommendations increase or decrease the diversity of content might indicate interesting outcomes as they directly impact streaming service users. 
  	In recent years, music streaming services replaced other channels of music distribution (Kim, Nam & Ryu, 2017), and shifted how people approach and listen to music. One of the most popular music streaming services is Spotify, which according to Statista (2020a), had 248 million monthly active users, marked by the end of the third quarter of 2019. Consequently, this placed Spotify on the top of the music streaming platforms in the world (De Silva, 2019). Moreover, this music service is using algorithms that recommend personalized playlists to their consumers. Every Monday, users of Spotify are introduced to 30 new songs from the Discover Weekly playlist, which is composed of the recommendation algorithms. Hence, by researching the connection between choices that algorithms made and how people encounter them, might bring relevant insights regarding the diversity of music and approaches toward algorithmic playlist.
      Thus, this research will explore and provide insight into the music industry, artists and consumers of streaming services. The data gathered might contribute to the music industry by examining whether their recommendation systems work in line with their predictions. Likewise, this research may highlight the issues that can be fixed to improve the recommendation playlists, offered by streaming services as it will also measure satisfaction. The study will bring insights regarding users' preferences that Spotify can directly use to improve their Discover Weekly playlist. Additionally, society will become more aware of the issue regarding the diversity of content that algorithms recommend. Furthermore, this study will expose whether the algorithms are perceived to increase the diversity of music and whether people are satisfied with the recommendations they receive. Thus, it will highlight the potential negative aspects e.g. that algorithms steer users' preferences toward music and offer them similar content which lacks diversity. Therefore, this study will expose how users perceive Discover Weekly recommendations and whether these are accurate in matching listeners needs and music taste.
      Moreover, as Ricci et al., (2010) state, recommender systems and algorithms became a popular topic of research. One of the reasons for that is the development of online sites e.g. Netflix, Amazon or Spotify, which are using them to make more personalized content for the users. Nonetheless, there is a research gap when it comes to discovering music with the use of recommended playlists. There have been several studies that focus on music recommendation systems and their influence on society (Slaney & White, 2006; Schedl & Hauger, 2015; Tang & Yang, 2017). In addition, scholars tend to focus on Spotify as the business model (Fleischer & Snickars, 2017; Kreitz & Nimela, 2010), or the music streaming services in general (Arditi, 2017; Wlömert & Papies, 2016). However, it seems that there are no insights on the playlists created by algorithms and the impact they may have on music diversity. Therefore, this thesis will contribute to the research field as it focuses on Spotify and their Discover Weekly. Furthermore, this playlist became one of the most popular tools for music discovery created by Spotify. Since 2015, when the playlist was officially launched, over 40 million of listeners started to use music recommendations created by algorithms (Prey, 2019). Consequently, this algorithmically created playlist became a new method to receive tailored suggestions that match users' needs and preferences. Hence, the analysis of the users of Discover Weekly playlist will allow bringing new information regarding the diversity of the content that is provided to them by algorithms. Besides, this thesis will explore how listeners of Discover Weekly perceive algorithms as recommendation tools and the extent to which they are satisfied with the algorithmically created playlist. Therefore, the main aim of this research is to answer the following question: to what extent does the diversity of the music recommended by the Discover Weekly playlists differ between heavy and light users of Spotify? 
      This thesis was organized to firstly introduce the main aim of the research and to briefly touch upon ideas that are building the research. In the second chapter, the literature and theories from other researchers are reviewed and used as building blocks to state hypotheses. The following chapter is focused on the research design and how the data gathering and analysis were guided. Moreover, the description of sample and data reduction is included in the methodology. The fourth chapter is a result section, where the outcomes of statistical analyses are presented. The last chapter includes the discussion on the insights that were analysed in the result section. In addition, this section contains the main conclusions and reflections on the study. At the end of the chapter, the limitations and guidelines for future researchers interested in this field are stated. 

59 Chapter 2. Theoretical Framework

This chapter examines the existing theories regarding music streaming services and the impact of recommendation systems on users. As the music platforms constantly increase in popularity, they became an interesting object to study. The first part of this chapter highlights the developments of music streaming services and the music industry. In addition, this section underlines how people make use of streaming services and how they discover new music with the use of recommendation systems. The following fragment focuses on the streaming service - Spotify, and its users. Moreover, the distinction between heavy and light users is proposed, as the differences between them influence the way in which they discover new content and the extent to which it is diverse. The theories in the third part touch upon concepts related to recommendation systems and how they impact users. As the information that people are receiving by algorithms might not be diverse, the concepts of echo chambers and filter bubbles are defined. The next section sheds light on the perceptions that users of Spotify may have regarding the content provided by recommendation systems. As consumers might mistrust the algorithmic suggestions, the aversion towards them is established. In contrary, if consumers trust and believe that recommendations created by the systems are precise, the phenomenon of algorithmic appreciation occurs. At the end, the concept of satisfaction is underlined. This concept indicates the basic achievement of algorithms if the user is satisfied with its newly created playlist. These theories and concepts are backbones for the study, as each of them influences the music discovering and content diversity proposed to users of Spotify. 

59.1 2.1. The music streaming services 
      Before trying to understand what role algorithms play in the music listening and what are the differences between the users of the streaming platform, it is necessary to understand the streaming music industry itself. Thus, this part highlights some insights regarding the streaming music market and how it developed with the expansion of technologies. Moreover, it explores the approaches that help users to discover new music and how music is consumed by them. 
      Many transformations and constant developments of the music industry were caused by the quick expansion of the Internet and new technologies (Kim, et al., 2017). As researchers argued, previously the artists distributed their music through tangible forms e.g. CD albums or cassettes (Kjus, 2016), and further through online downloads from the web (Kim et al., 2017). According to Kjus (2016), the 2000s brought a new wave of music distribution: online streaming services, which shifted the way how people consume and discover music. The rise of these platforms was also caused by the developments of mobile devices, which influenced the accessibility to music (Kim, et al., 2017). Every year the number of new records released is growing due to the technological improvements. This reflects the claim by McCourt and Zuberi (2016) that the music content took upon a fluid form and became less tangible, which facilitated streaming services to continuously increase in popularity, leaving behind CDs and online-downloading methods (Trefzger, Rose, Baccarella, & Voigt, 2015). Moreover, as Waelbroeck (2013) argued, digital technologies shaped the way in which consumers discover new music and artists. In the past, music listeners had to purchase and collect separate cassettes or discs to listen to the audio content. Thus, it made music discovering more expensive and less accessible. The improvement of online media, social platforms, cloud computing and streaming services exposed users to large catalogues of music. In addition, these online tools facilitated the exploration and discovery of new music content and allowed users to receive tailored recommendations directly from the service. Waelbroeck (2013) claimed that this creates the phenomenon known as the 'long tail', as it generates business models grounded on less popular products, which would be difficult to find in regular shops. This corresponds to the claim of Tepper and Hargittai that "information technologies offer tools for users to navigate ever-expanding cultural catalogues" (2009, p. 232). Consequently, the accessibility to these wide catalogues encourages users to discover and experience new music. As scholars argued, these digital technologies decreased the costs of search for novel artists and downloading new songs, additionally, they allowed users to try the content before the purchase (McCourt & Zuberi, 2016).  
      As Thomsen (2013) claimed, "the underlying concept of streaming services relies on inducing music consumers to listen to streaming music on demand" (2013, p. 81). Wlömert and Papies (2016), stated that music streaming services are differentiated by the business models they adopt. According to scholars, the most popular is on-demand streaming, used by platforms like Spotify (Wlömert & Papies, 2016; Thomsen, 2013). This model allows users to access broad catalogues of songs, without paying for each item separately. It gives the customers two options of streaming subscription: monthly-paid and advertisements-based models. The first form of subscription, also called premium, charges consumers at a fixed rate each month and it offers additional benefits to the users. As Thomsen (2013) claimed, the paid subscription does not limit the access to the broad catalogues of music service, and it gives users an option to listen to the music offline through the application. On the other hand, the advertisement-based model allows for the free of charge access by getting income from advertising (Wlömert & Papies, 2016). However, the freemium model of subscription has its limitations. This subscription does not allow to access the music catalogues in the same sound quality as a premium subscription and has lesser access to music libraries (Waelbroeck, 2013). Therefore, the differences between subscriptions might contribute to answer the main research question as the freemium users might perceive diversity of music differently than premium users. 

59.1.1 2.1.2. Discovering new music 
As previously mentioned, the phenomenon of discovering new music is significantly impacted by digital platforms, as they allow users to access a large variety of content. Moreover, these services facilitated the rise of many online communities, where people can effortlessly discover new content and receive recommendations from others. As Waelbroeck claimed, these Internet-based communities created the phenomenon of the 'long tail', which is "a business model based on the exploitation of niche products hard to find in physical stores" (2013, p. 392). This exposure to the music available on on-demand platforms shaped the manner in which users discover new audio content. There are several approaches that consumers might take for music exploration. As Goldmann and Kreitz (2011) argued, there are two methods in which listeners can discover new music; searching, where users explore services to find songs or artists, and browsing, where consumers can display particular artist's playlist. In contrary, McCourt and Zuberi (2016) claimed that nowadays music discovering is dependent on the online tools e.g. algorithmically created playlists, which direct users across the catalogues suggested to them based on their music preferences. In addition, Tepper and Hargittai (2009) argued that content discovering is based on the recommendations that people receive. They distinguish three methods in which consumers discover new music. Firstly, users base their discoveries on suggestions from friends and relatives. Secondly, they receive and acknowledge recommendations from the mainstream media, and thirdly from new media and algorithms (Tepper & Hargittai, 2009). Recently, scholars considered how consumers rely on recommendations from friends, social networks or algorithms. As Tepper and Hargittai (2009) suggested in their study, social media spread varied information, including news in culture from which people may receive novel content. While the scholars were researching students approaches towards recommendations and music discovering, they found that students acquire some suggestions from digital media, however, they find recommendations from their social groups and mainstream media more accurate (Tepper & Hargittai, 2009). In comparison, in later study Kjus (2016) highlighted that most of the time, music discovering is not initiated by the streaming platforms, but by the inspirations from acquaintances or live music concerts. Thus, even though there is a difference of seven years between these two studies, both highlight that people prefer recommendations from friends and traditional media. However, music platforms serve as great tools to expand music libraries by suggestions from peers (Kjus, 2016).

59.2 2.2. Users of Spotify 
As mentioned in the introduction, there are 248 million active monthly users of Spotify, which makes it the leader among music streaming services (Spotify, 2020a). Every day, users access Spotify listen to their favourite music or to discover new content. Moreover, with the use of tools available on the service, listeners can organise their music into playlists, or search for already created compilations based on their preferences or mood (Goldmann & Kreitz, 2011). 
	Spotify offers two different subscription types for its users; freemium and premium version of subscription. Both models allow access to over 50 million songs and podcasts. However, the unpaid version interrupts listeners with the advertisements and a limited number of possibilities to skip to the next songs. On the other hand, Spotify premium works offline, ad-free and with unlimited chances to go throughout the broad catalogues of music (Spotify, 2020b). This reflects what Aguiar (2017) claimed influences the music listening, as the paid subscription allows for more active music discovering by the possibility of changing songs, and the free subscription which is a more passive way of music listening with the content restrictions (Aguiar, 2017). Consequently, as Mehrotra, Lalmas, Kenny, Lim-Meng and Hashemian (2019) argued, Spotify users can be categorised into active listeners and passive listeners. The distinction was made by the approach that consumers have towards music listening, in active listening people tend to discover and explore new music and artists more. Consequently, passive music listening was connotated with streaming music in the background or by accessing saved playlists. However, Schedl and Hauger (2015) defined three different users listening characteristics: diversity, mainstreamness and novelty. The diversity of music is based on the users' taste, measured by quantity of times the song is listened to and by the different genres appearing in the user's music compilations. Mainstreamness reflects the preferences toward popular songs and artists, and novelty is defined by the demand to discover new music. In addition, Aguiar (2017), claimed that users can be categorised by the quantity of time spent on music listening through the music platform. The quantity category reflects the amount of music that is consumed by the users and groups them into heavy or light users of streaming service, which was argued in more depth below.

59.2.1 2.2.1. Heavy Users & Light Users of Music Streaming Services
In the study regarding students and the methods in which they discover new music, Tepper and Hargittai (2009) claimed that heavy Internet users are expected to use new technology more to discover and consume new music content. And even though this study is from 2009, it is still assumed that heavy Internet users are spending more time on new technologies, which allow them to discover new content. Consequently, people who are less active in the web are considered light users, who do not discover the wide catalogues of music available online. On the other hand, Aguiar's (2017) study that focused on music streaming services argued that light users might be considered as people who consume less music through the service. In contrary, the heavy users are defined as listeners who consume a larger amount of music content that is available. In addition, Datta, Knox and Bronnenberg found that "streaming increases total consumption, leads to more variety, and facilitates the discovery of more highly valued music (2017, p. 19), which leads to the assumption that the more users are using music streaming services, the more diverse is their content. Furthermore, Prey (2017) claimed that, when users actively interact with the platform, they provide more detailed information regarding their preferences resulting in larger variety of content recommended to them by the algorithms. This approach goes in line with what Tepper and Hargittai (2009) found, that users who are actively discovering new music content will be expected to make use more of digital technology to do so. 
	Therefore, the main assumption is that heavy users are more exposed to diverse content as they use new technologies and algorithms to find new music more. Subsequently, light users spend less time on music listening and discovering, thus their content is less diverse. Hence, two hypotheses were stated to investigate whether different types of consumers make use of Spotify contrarily:

H1: The heavy users of Spotify use the Discover Weekly playlist more than light users of Spotify.
H2: The heavy Spotify users have a more diverse Discover Weekly playlist than light Spotify users.    
59.3 2.3. The role of the Recommendation Systems 
As the amount of data that circulates on the Internet is enormous, it created an issue for users to select the most relevant information (Bozdag, 2013). This situation led to creation of recommendation systems and algorithms by search tools like Google, social media like Facebook and streaming services like Spotify, which create tailored content that matches users' needs (Bozdag, 2013).
   Recommendation systems can be defined as tools that propose content or products for consumers to make the process of decision-making easier. With a number of playlists overreaching 3 billion and 50 million songs, Spotify users are exposed to almost unlimited content (Spotify, 2019a). Consequently, consumers might feel overwhelmed by the amount of music available on the platform. Therefore, the music service provides users with a recommended playlist personalized for them. The Discover Weekly playlist is one of the examples that offer customers new content. From 2015, every Monday morning, users of Spotify are introduced to 30 new songs composed into one playlist (Prey, 2017). The playlist is personalized for each of the service subscribers separately, based on data gathered from their listening history (Spotify, 2019c). To elaborate more on how Discover Weekly is created, first it is important to analyse factors that build a personalized playlist, the algorithms of Spotify. 
       According to Prey (2017), Spotify is using a hybrid recommender system, which is a combination of specific models. Firstly, Spotify is using collaborative filtering, which gathers information about the music tracks and behaviour of users and their friends to make recommendations (Ciocca, 2017). The second model of recommendation algorithms used by the platform is Natural Language Processing. It focuses on text and lyrics of songs, and it searches for patterns related to the music (Boyd, 2019). The third category that improves the precision of Spotify recommendations is the raw audio model. This model is focused on highlighting the key audio elements of each song to further compare the new tracks with the songs that users enjoyed previously (Ciocca, 2017). As Thorat, Goudar and Barave (2015) claimed, it is expected that recommendation systems increase the diversity of content since they support the discovering of new items. Additionally, Ricci et al. (2010) stated that "in a recommendation list, it is more likely that the user will find a suitable item if there is a certain degree of diversity among the included items" (p. 26). However, as L'Huillier, Castagnos and Boyer (2015) noticed, recommendation systems do not take into consideration human factors i.e. context, confidence, explanation and need for diversity. These features play an important role during the decision-making process, especially regarding the need for diversity. Moreover, they are also significant as they increase consumers' satisfaction (L'Huillier, et al., 2015). Hence, the algorithmically created Discover Weekly playlist is a tool to enhance content diversity and music discovering. Moreover, it enables users to expand their music catalogues from what they were already familiar with. Thus, the following hypothesis regarding differences between consumers content and recommended playlists is stated, assuming that algorithms offer more diverse music:

H3: The heavy users of Spotify perceive Discover Weekly playlist to influence diversity of music more than light users of Spotify.

59.3.1 2.3.1. The impact of personalized recommendations on users 
The following section emphasises how personalized recommendations and algorithms might affect users. As the main focus of this paper is on the diversity of music content and how algorithms influence that, it is important to discuss concepts like echo chambers and filter bubbles, which are related to that variety (Möller, et al., 2018; Flaxman, et al., 2016; Bozdag, 2013). 
	As Bozdag (2013) emphasised, people actively contribute to the creation of online material, either by posting about themselves, their families or other aspects of their lives. Additionally, news and information are continuously produced by media outlets and other businesses (Bozdag, 2013). All of that creates an enormous quantity of data, which can be selected by the search engines, social media and recommendation systems and displayed to the users. As Bozdag (2013) noticed, this formed a new kind of gatekeepers, that are using recommendation systems and algorithms to choose content for its users. What Hosanagar, et al., (2013) stated is that recommendation systems and algorithms have a significant potential to facilitate consumers discovery and search of new content, which may be outside the range that they are familiar with. However, this brought many doubts raised by researchers that these algorithms influence negatively the content that users get by the lack of diversity within it (Möller, et al., 2018; Haim, Graefe, & Brosius, 2018; Helberger, Karppinen, & D'Acunto, 2018).
	In the study made by Möller, et al. (2018), the researchers claimed that users are willingly closing themselves in 'echo chambers', when they are offered with sufficient choice. In addition, this phenomenon continues to present similar content, based on the persons' previous preferences and choices. Flaxman, et al. (2016), found in their experiment that participants select news articles that match their political values and beliefs. On the other hand, scholars argue that when people are inside the echo chambers, they will think that they received all of the information (Dubois & Blank, 2018). Further research led scholars to another concept, filter bubbles, that underlines the situation in which consumers are exposed to similar content. As Flaxman et al. pointed out, "search engines, news aggregators, and social networks are increasingly personalizing content through machine-learning models, potentially creating "filter bubbles" in which algorithms inadvertently amplify ideological segregation by automatically recommending content an individual is likely to agree with" (2016, p. 299). This can be also applied to music, as the algorithmically created recommendations might feed users with non-diverse content, based on their previous preferences. However, the scholars also argue that the increase of social media platforms and the Internet allowed people to access more diverse content and information. There are claims that in the music consumption the tailored recommendations expand the diversity of users' playlists (Hosanagar, et al., 2013). 
 
59.4 2.4. Perceptions of Algorithms for Music Discovery 
As it was already stated, technological developments in the music industry and the streaming services brought many changes. Numerous companies, including Spotify, invested in recommendation systems, which would enrich searching and discovering new music. While scholars argue that algorithms can calculate data accurately and create propositions, which would match users' preferences perfectly, there is a notion that recommendations from humans are still more precise (Yeomans, Shah, Mullainathan & Kleinberg, 2019). As Castelo, Bos and Lehmann (2019) suggest it is due to the fact that people can provide explanations to their suggestions and seem to be more confident, while providing information. Moreover, it is argued that recommendations from other humans include more subjective preferences and are based on the information about receivers. As Yeomans et al. (2019) state, people are searching for suggestions from close friends and family, as they know their tastes. In contrary, it is assumed that algorithms that build recommendation, work with limited data and insights regarding consumers unique preferences (Yeomans et al., 2019). These assumptions and predictions about algorithms and recommended content, built positive and negative perceptions regarding trust and satisfaction of suggested content. 

59.4.1 2.4.1. Algorithmic Aversion and Appreciation 
The purpose of algorithms is to provide consumers with new music content that is based on users' previous preferences and history of listening (Ziegler, McNee, Konstan & Lausen, 2005). However, there might be different approaches toward recommendation systems, reliance on them and their precision. When users do not believe in generic suggestions and do not accept the algorithmic judgement about their preferences, it is defined as algorithmic aversion (Logg, et al., 2018). On the other hand, the phenomenon to trust and prefer the suggestions made by algorithms is labelled as algorithmic appreciation. As there are many studies investigating an issue on whom users rely on more regarding content suggestions, there is a majority of studies showing that consumers prefer human recommendations over algorithms. 
      In the study by Castelo, et al. (2019), scholars revived theoretical frameworks conducted to measure trust in algorithms and their recommendations. Promberger and Baron (2006) and Longoni, Bonezzi, Morewedge (2019) focused their interests on the algorithms used in medical sphere. The outcomes indicated that people are averse towards medical algorithms, and that they prefer the doctor's opinion as they will take into consideration uniqueness of their conditions. In addition, researchers found that people tend to rate physicians more positively if they were not diagnosing them with the use of algorithms (Shaffer, Probst, Merkle, Arkes, & Medow, 2013). The mistrust towards algorithms was also underlined by Önkal, Goodwin, Thomson, Gönül, and Pollock (2009), who claimed that while forecasting the stock prices, humans did not appreciate algorithmic guidance. Another reason why people do not trust algorithms is because they do not provide explanations to their suggestions in comparison to human recommendations (Castelo, et al., 2019). Furthermore, Dietvorst, Simmons, and Massey (2014) argued that while algorithms were seen as better than humans at avoiding simple mistakes, people were perceived as more efficient in learning on mistakes and improving skills with time. Yeomans, et al. (2019) argued that people are averse towards algorithms, when it comes to predicting humour. Participants of the study claimed that they prefer to receive recommendations directly from other users or their friends. This phenomenon occurs due to the fact that people are not aware how the algorithms and recommendation systems work, for them the suggestions they get from other people are simpler to understand (Yeomans, et al., 2019). In regard to discovering new music, Tepper and Hargittai (2009) found that consumers still prefer recommendations received from their acquaintances and traditional media. 
      However, Logg, et al. (2019) suggested, people do rely on algorithms' recommendations. As the research participants indicated, they preferred advice given by the recommendation systems over the other people. They underlined algorithmic appreciation towards different advices, including business, art and music content and romantic interests. Scholars also found that study subjects preferred to select suggestions made by algorithms over the human judgments when they could choose. Moreover, researchers established that participants preferred algorithmic selections over their own choices (Logg, et al. 2019). As Castelo et al. stated, "algorithms become increasingly capable of outperforming humans at tasks ranging from making recommendations (for, e.g., music, movies, stocks) to diagnosing diseases and driving cars, a key issue is whether (or at least when or how quickly) and for what purposes humans will trust and use them" (2019, p. 13). The new positive shift towards algorithms can be seen in growing popularity of recommended playlists on Spotify. However, which users appreciate them or feel aversion to music created by algorithms might depend on usage of the service. As Tepper and Hargittai (2009) also pointed out, digital media are used to discover new music mainly by consumers who are heavy users. They do so to expand their music libraries by allowing technologies to search and recommend them new music content. Thus, the assumption was made, that heavy users will appreciate algorithmic suggestions more in comparison to light users, as they are less open for digital media to guidance their content. Therefore, the hypothesis was stated:

H4: The heavy users appreciate the recommendations of Discover Weekly more than light Spotify users. 

59.4.2 2.4.2. Algorithmic Satisfaction
The exposure to the large amount of content available on the Internet challenges people with the phenomenon of so-called information overload (Hijikata, Shimizu & Nishida, 2009). Thus, to find fitting content to users' needs, online retailers or content providers are making use of recommendation systems. However, people who receive these suggestions might not be satisfied with the content they acquired. As the broad definition of satisfaction covers an idea of emotional response to expectations fulfilment (Giese & Cote, 2000), the satisfaction is usually measured to test the products or services and their quality among users (Perkins, 1993). 
      As Garcia-Gathright, St. Thomas, Hosey, Nazari and Diaz claimed, "designing music information access systems requires understanding the diverse needs of users and their expectations of system performance. Such needs include mood-setting, social standing, or nostalgia" (2018, p. 55). Thus, the interactions between users and music streaming services are crucial for gathering data on which the recommendations are built on. The more insights about person are collected, the more precise and personal the recommendations might be, and consequently it can increase the satisfaction of suggestions. As Kompan and Bieliková (2013) stated, satisfaction of recommender systems reflects the actual emotional approach toward suggestions made by the algorithms. Additionally, the satisfaction depends on the quality and precision of the suggestions that are made for users. Thus, the manner in which recommendations are presented and systematized is a crucial aspect, which can increase users' satisfaction (Nanou, Lekakos & Fouskas, 2010). Moreover, scholars found that if the satisfaction of recommendations is higher, it will positively impact the overall success of the platform (Chun & Hahn, 2006), and also it will develop loyalty and engagement between the service and a consumer (Chan, Cheung, Shi & Lee, 2014). 
      Therefore, as the algorithms gather more data about the users throughout their music consumption, it can be assumed that the recommendations might be more precise. The precision of the suggested content might be understood as the factor, which will increase the satisfaction of consumers. However, listeners who are satisfied with their music recommendations more, might be also consumers, who use the platform and algorithmic playlists more often and are heavy listeners. Thus, the two hypotheses were stated, as it is important to test whether users who use Spotify and Discover Weekly playlist are more satisfied with the content that is recommended to them. Moreover, the second hypothesis is based on the differences in satisfaction between premium and freemium users as they access the music platform differently:
      
H5: The heavy users are more satisfied with the recommendations of Discover Weekly than light Spotify users.
H6: Users with premium subscription model are more satisfied with the recommendations of Discover Weekly than users of freemium subscription model.



60 Chapter 3. Methodology 

60.1 3.1. Choice of method 
The main aim of this research is to answer the question regarding the diversity of the music that is recommended to Spotify listeners by the Discover Weekly playlist, and how it relates to differences between the users. Thus, to compare groups of users and their content diversity on the music streaming service, the most suitable method for this study is a quantitative one. As Neuman (2014) claimed, quantitative research aims to "precisely capture details of the empirical social world and express what we find in numbers" (p. 204). In contrary, qualitative methods were not suitable as they aim to understand the insightful meanings of social phenomenon by analysing the intuitive and explanatory reflections of the respondents or units of analysis, which would not allow to measure the extent to which users differ regarding their music diversity (Brennen, 2017). Furthermore, as the core assumptions about the differences between groups of listeners and their music diversity were grounded in previous theories regarding algorithms and recommendation systems, this research is of deductive nature. In quantitative studies, the deductive approach is very often entailed as it allows to establish hypotheses founded on theories, which are later tested by the statistical analyses (Bryman, 2012). Thus, executing the quantitative research allows to present the outcomes from different users and measure the diversity of the music that they consume with the use of numerical data. Besides, due to its numerical nature, quantitative methods enable the researcher to analyse the outcomes with the use of statistical tests (Babbie, 2017).
      As this study focuses on listeners' perceptions of algorithms and music diversity, surveys were found to be the most adequate technique that allows gathering information about these issues from a significant set of population (Matthews & Ross, 2010; Babbie, 2017). 
As Fink stated, "survey is a system for collecting information from or about people to describe, compare, or explain their knowledge, attitudes, and behavior" (2011a, p. 2). This method allows the researcher to ask many questions simultaneously by the use of different variables. Doing so allows us to collect different data and test various hypotheses by conducting one survey (Neuman, 2014). An additional advantage of questionnaires over the other research methods is the fact that they collect insights directly from the participants of the study in a short period of time (Fink, 2011a). 
	Moreover, as the main focus is on the online music streaming platform and its users, the most suitable form of collecting data is an online survey. As Van Selem and Jankowski (2006) argued, online surveys are an appropriate technique particularly to gather information about the users of the Internet or online services. Thus, to measure diversity and perceptions towards Discover Weekly playlist an online questionnaire gathered information directly from the Spotify users. As scholars also underlined, the reason to use this method is due to the fact that it allows collecting insights from the respondents that have particular interests in the subject and are willing to answer the questions without costs of conducting the research (Van Selem & Jankowski, 2006). 
	There are certain advantages and disadvantages while conducting an online survey. Overall, the fact that it is inexpensive and can reach significant group of respondents is beneficial for the researcher and the purpose of this thesis. In addition, online surveys allowed for flexible design and use of specialistic software that facilitates collection of the data (Neuman, 2014). However, by using surveys it is more difficult to make causal claims than with the use of other methods e.g. experiments. Moreover, researchers also argued that surveys conducted via Web caused challenges to data privacy and verification, unequal access to use the Internet and problems while designing survey with multiple software. Thus, to overcome these issues and support the data collection, the online software Qualtrics was used to organize the questions of the surveys. Moreover, this program assisted with data collection and analysis of the feedback from a large number of respondents, which saved time and helped categorizing the outcomes (Qualtrics, 2020). Furthermore, the surveys that are conducted via the software are completely anonymous, thus the concern regarding the privacy of respondents was not an issue, and it was assured that data will not be used for other purposes than answering the research question stated in this master thesis. 

60.2 3.2. Sampling 
As Fink stated, "a good sample is a miniature version of the population of which it is a part" (2011b, p. 3) thus, as this study focuses on Spotify and its users, the sample of population has to be based on the respondents that make use of the music streaming service. The usage of Spotify is the main characteristic that served as guideline of the selection process of the sample, as these participants were able to contribute to the research. The surveys were available to everyone, however, if respondents were not subscribers to the music platform they were not taken into consideration in this study. To distinguish if participants use Spotify or not, a filter question was included at the beginning of the survey, which excluded people who do not use the music platform. Hence, it created a sampling frame of people who are subscribers and are listening to music on Spotify. 
      However, as it was underlined in the theory part, there are four possible groups of platform users. The first two groups were based on the subscription model; free and premium. Additionally, there were categories created based on quantity of music streamed by users, which divided listeners on heavy and light. Therefore, to compare these groups and to be able to measure their music diversity it was preferable for the research purpose to have balanced number of respondents between these listeners categories. Thus, the sample size for this research was set at minimum of 300 respondents, which for survey research allowed to generalize the outcomes and state suitable final conclusions. Moreover, this significant group of study participants permitted to state assumptions regarding different groups of Spotify users, which decreased chances of sampling error (Bryman, 2012). 
      
60.2.1 3.2.1. Sampling Method
As it was argued by Van Selem and Jankowski (2006), when conducting online surveys the sampling method is already assumed to be non-probabilistic. To select the sample with the probability method for the purpose of this study, the researcher would have to have full access to the list of all of the Spotify consumers. However, because it was impossible to receive the complete list and conduct the random selection of all users the non-probabilistic method was used. This technique is defined by the lack of random selection from the population based on probability, thus not all of the people have the same chances to be picked for the research (Babbie, 2017). Accordingly, for this research, the non-probability method is the most adequate as it allows to approach many users of streaming service and as Van Selem and Jankowski underlined, "even though these [online] surveys are not representative for the total population of Internet users, non-probability samples can be valuable as they may be representative for a subgroup of the total population" (2006, p. 439).
   As in this research units of analysis were Spotify subscribers, the purposive method was selected. This technique of sampling focuses on picking the respondents with the particular characteristics based on the researcher judgements (Babbie, 2017). Moreover, the purposive method allowed to investigate the research question in more depth, as it focuses on the particular cases that will the most effectively present the phenomenon (Matthews & Ross, 2010). As scholars advised, to conduct the online survey among potential respondents that have above-mentioned characteristics, the Internet environment can be helpful (Van Selem & Jankowski, 2006). The online based groups operate as the places where people with similar interests or hobbies exchange their opinions and thoughts regarding various issues. Thus, to approach certain users, the online surveys were distributed through Facebook e.g. Spotify Promotion with almost twenty-nine thousand followers, and Reddit communities e.g. Spotify with over two-hundred thousand followers or Audio Engineering with one-hundred eighty thousand followers. These social media also enabled the direct contact with people who have an understanding of the platform and are subscribers of it. Besides, it allowed accessing large population of people who were online and were willing to fill in the surveys. Furthermore, the survey was uploaded on Spotify Community website, where people share their interests and knowledge about the platform and music. As Van Selem and Jankowski (2006) pointed out, these self-organized groups are valuable for the researcher as they permit the access to characteristic population, which is central to answer the research question. Moreover, by reaching to different groups on various social media allowed to distribute survey to significant number of respondents. Thus, it gathered insights from different types of Spotify users and reduced the sampling bias. 

60.2.2 3.2.2. Sample 
After the data was collected, the total number of respondents that were 18 years old or older and agreed to take part in this research by signing the consent form reached 342 respondents. As this study focuses on the insights from Spotify users, the question regarding music platform usage was a filter question. Consequently, if respondents selected that they are not using Spotify, they were automatically directed to the end of the survey and were not taken into consideration while analysing the data. However, the final sample without participants that are not using Spotify, was still equal to N=342 (100%). 
      The descriptive statistics showed that among respondents, 297 (86.8%) are using premium version of subscription and 44 (12.9%) of respondents are using the freemium model to access Spotify. Moreover, the statistics indicated that there were 205 (59.9%) male respondents, 125 (36.5%) female participants, 4 (1.2%) respondents that selected 'other', and 7 (2%), who chose to rather not say regarding gender. Furthermore, survey responses came from 45 different countries, however, the majority of them were from The United States 140 (40.9%), followed by The United Kingdom 31 (9.1%), Poland 21 (6.1%), Canada 20 (5.8%) and The Netherlands 19 (5.6%). Participants' average age was 26.73 (SD=7.24), with the youngest participants of the age of 18, and the oldest who had 58 years old. From 337 participants that named their highest educational level they obtained; the highest frequency had bachelor's degree in collage (4-years) reaching 123 (36%) of respondents, followed by some collage but not degree 74 (21.6%), and high school graduate 52 (15.2%) and Master's degree 52 (15.2%). 
60.3 3.3. Operationalisation 
The following part is crucial in the quantitative study, as it links the theoretical concepts and changes them into measurable variables (Neuman, 2014). The theory in this study touched upon various definitions and thoughts, which in operationalization section are translated into empirical measures, that aimed to test if the hypotheses occurs within the society (Neuman, 2014). Thus, in total there have been different variables selected that will facilitate to answer the research question regarding users of Spotify and the impact that algorithms have on music diversity. 
	To provide the anonymity of respondents, the consent form was added at the beginning of survey with the general introduction of the study. The participants were assured that the information they provide will be secured and not shared for other purposes than this master thesis. Following this part, the first question of the questionnaire filtered users of Spotify by asking directly whether respondents make use of music platform or not. When the answer was selected as 'no', they were automatically moved to the end of the survey. However, if the answer was chosen as 'yes', they were able to proceed with more questions.

60.3.1 3.3.1. Users of Spotify as the Independent variable 
In this study, the independent variables are the heavy and light users of the music platform. In the survey, the part of the questions was dedicated to defining to which groups respondents belong to. 

60.3.1.1 Heavy and Light Users of Spotify 
To determine whether the respondents belong to the group of heavy or light listeners of Spotify, the survey has to examine question regarding quantity of music streamed and perceptions of being a heavy or light listener. As it was stated in the theory, the more users are consuming music on the platform, the most probable it is that they belong to heavy group of listeners. In contrary, if participants argue that they have a profile on Spotify, but do not necessarily use it, it might be stated that they belong to the group of light listeners. Hence, the question regarding amount of time spent on Spotify was an indicator of whether someone is light or heavy user of the music platform. Thus, the question asked respondents to indicate "how many hours per week to you listen to Spotify, on average?". As for the answer, the participants were asked to fill in he estimated time that they believe is an average of hours spent on listening to the music on Spotify per week. The distinction whether someone belongs to heavy or light group of users of Spotify was based on the report that indicated that on average people listen to music 18 hours per week (IFPI, 2019). Thus, when respondents indicated that they listen to Spotify on average less than 18 hours weekly they were considered as light users. In contrary, when participants stated that they listen more than 18 hours per week, they were assigned to heavy users' group. Additionally, to remove outliers, the maximum of 12 hours per day was set. Therefore, when respondents claimed they listen to more than 84 hours of Spotify weekly, they were not taken into consideration. 
	Moreover, four questions in the survey examined whether participants of the research identify themselves as heavy or light users of Spotify. Thus, the questions regarding their perceptions of affiliation were asked directly. Perhaps, "do you agree or disagree with the statement: I consider myself as a light user of Spotify". These questions were created with the use of Likert scale, where participants could choose from the scale of seven-point answers (1 = strongly disagree ... 7 = strongly agree). In addition, six statements were added to distinguish passive or active use of Spotify. These statements were built on framework from Mehrotra, et al. (2019), where respondents could disagree or agree with the use of seven-point Likers scale. This part included statements e.g. "I use Spotify to play music in the background" or "I use Spotify to explore artists or albums more deeply". Thus, first three out of six statements were focused to select a passive use of Spotify, and accordingly next three statements were built in a manner to distinguish active use of music platform. Consequently, the reliability test was conducted whether these items can be combined into variables indicating passive or active music listening. The test exposed that for passive music listening Cronbach's α = .68, and for active music listening the listening Cronbach's α = .71, which mean that both variables are acceptable. 

60.3.1.2 Freemium Subscribers & Premium Subscribers
As it was argued in the theory part, heavy users spend more time to discover new content, however, much also depends on the subscription model they have. As premium subscribers are not interrupted by advertisements, they are also allowed to select and play any audio they want, without an Internet connection. Therefore, the question regarding Spotify subscription model was included in the survey. This allowed to examine if the users with paid subscription have more diverse playlists as they have better access to music catalogues. 

60.3.2 3.3.2. Dependent Variables
In this research there are several dependent variables that are influenced by the type of the Spotify user. As this study aimed to answer the research question to what extent does the diversity of recommended playlist differ between users, the variables as music diversity was stated. Moreover, as the Discover Weekly playlist was created by the algorithms, the different perceptions of them, including appreciation, aversion and satisfaction, were also the dependent variables in this research. 
      Moreover, in order to answer the research question and hypotheses, the first step was to organize gathered data and create new variables. As the measurements were based on previous research, reliability tests had to be conducted to measure whether they are still applicable. As Pallant (2007) claimed, reliability tests allow to find out whether the survey items measure the same concepts as intended. Moreover, the Cronbach's alpha coefficient was selected as the most commonly used indicator to test reliability of scales. In this analysis, when the Cronbach alpha is higher than .70, it means that scale is reliable. Thus, these tests were conducted for dependent variables. 

60.3.2.1 Music Diversity of Discover Weekly
As Castells, Hurley and Vargas claimed, "diversity generally applies to a set of items or "pieces", and has to do with how different the items or pieces are with respect to each other" (2015, p. 884). As the surveys were sent directly to Spotify users, they were asked to answer Likert scale questions regarding diversity of their music content provided by Discover Weekly, with seven-point scale answers vary from strongly disagree to strongly agree. The questions that explored the overall perceptions of audio content provided by algorithms were stated based on the measurements used in the study by Tintarev, Lofi and Liem (2017). Firstly, the survey questioned respondents to indicate whether their "Music provided by Discover Weekly playlist consist of a good variety of songs" and the same sort of question was asked regarding the genres of music and artists recommended by the algorithms. Furthermore, participants were requested to state if the music suggested by Discover Weekly sounds similar to the music that they are already acquainted with and if the artists suggested by Spotify are often the same as the artists that they listen to e.g. "Do you agree or disagree with the statement: I am often familiar with the songs that are suggested to me by Discover Weekly". Answers to these questions were grounded in the seven-point Likert scale varying from strongly disagree to strongly agree. 
      In order to organize and check whether there are subscales within diversity, the factor analysis was conducted. The first step was to reverse all of the statements with negative wording. There were three statements where the scores had to be reversed (where 1=7... 7=1) and the structure of statement was modified for the further analysis. The reversed statements were as follow: 'Discover Weekly provides me with music content that I do not recognize', 'Discover Weekly provides me with artists that I do not recognize', and 'the artists I see on Discover Weekly and my music on Spotify are different'. This procedure was done to allow for the factor analysis of the data regarding music diversity. 
      The 13 items which were based on the Likert-scale, were included in the factor analysis with the use of principal components with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1), KMO=.86, X2(N=210, 78) = 1210.12, p < .001. The resultant model explained 64.8% of the variance in perceptions of diversity of music provided by the Discover Weekly playlist. Factor loadings of individual items onto the three factors are present in the Table 1. The factors that were found are as follows: 

Artists and Songs Diversity (M= 5.43, SD= .96): This factor includes four items that are related to the variety of artists and songs that are recommended by Discover Weekly playlist. This factor was combined of the perceptions like; "Discover Weekly consists a good variety of songs", "Discover Weekly consists a good variety of artists", and perceptions that "Discover Weekly playlist allows to discover new artists" and "Discover Weekly playlist allows to discover new songs". 

Discover Weekly Content Familiarity (M= 3.62, SD= 1.04): The second factor was built based on five items related to familiarity with the content that is provided by Discover Weekly. It was based on statements regarding perceptions as follow; "I am often familiar with songs recommended by Discover Weekly", "I am often familiar with artist recommended by Discover Weekly", "Discover Weekly provides me with music content that I do recognize", "Discover Weekly provides me with artists that I do recognize" and "the artists I see on Discover Weekly and my music on Spotify are similar".

Genres Diversity (M= 4.30, SD= 1.17): The last factor was based on four items that are related to statements about diversity of music genres. This set of items included statements like; "content that is recommended by Discover Weekly allows me to explore new music genres", "I think that Discover Weekly provides me with diverse content", "I see a variety of music genres between my music on Spotify and Discover Weekly recommendations", "music provided by Discover Weekly consists of a good variety of music genres". 

Table. 1. Factor and reliability analyses for scales for perceptions of diversity of music provided by Discover Weekly (N=207)
ItemsArtists and Songs DiversityDiscover Weekly Content FamiliarityGenres DiversityMusic provided by Discover Weekly consists of a good variety of songs.743--Content that is recommended by Discover Weekly allows me to discover new songs.836--Music provided by Discover Weekly consists of a good variety of artists.790--Content that is recommended by Discover Weekly allows me to explore new music artists.741--I am often familiar with the songs that are suggested to me by Discover Weekly-.790-Discover Weekly provides me with music content that I do not recognize (R)-.611-I am often familiar with the artists that are suggested to me by Discover Weekly-.859-Discover Weekly provides me with artists that I do not recognize (R)-.636-The artists I see on Discover Weekly and my music on Spotify are different (R)-.588-Content that is recommended by Discover Weekly allows me to explore new music genres--.695I think that Discover Weekly provides me with diverse content--.668I see a variety of music genres between my music on Spotify and Discover Weekly recommendations--.769Music provided by Discover Weekly consists of a good variety of music genres--.773R2.23.21.20Cronbach's α
.85.80.79After creating three new variables the reliability test for them was conducted to analyse whether they can be combined into one variable that would indicate the overall music diversity. The test presented Cronbach's α = -.32 for these 3 items. Thus, the one variable could not be created. However, the two new variables indicating diversity of artists/songs and diversity of genres reached the Cronbach's α = .72, meaning it is acceptable, thus, these two variables were combined into one that was labelled indicating content diversity (M= 4.82, SD= .95). 
61 
61.1.1.1 Algorithmic Appreciation and Algorithmic Aversion 
This variable was measured by questions regarding trust and preferences towards recommendations. Hence, a Likert scale was used to facilitate respondents' answers. As it was mentioned in the theory section, people tend to base their judgment on other people, and consequently they do not trust in algorithmic suggestions. Thus, the questions regarding trust were asked to assess to what extent Spotify listeners believe that algorithms know their preferences towards music. To measure whether respondents appreciate or not the algorithmically created playlists, three blocks of statements were built. The first two sections were asking participants about their perceptions toward Discover Weekly, with the use of seven-point Likert scale varying from strongly disagree to strongly agree. Firstly, respondents were asked about which recommendation matches their music tastes better i.e. "songs recommended to me by my friends and family usually match my music taste". The following section focused more on preferences on suggestions to search for new music i.e. "having algorithmic recommendations from Discover Weekly playlists is a good way to find new music". The third block of statements were considering whether participants agree or disagree. These statements were answered by the seven-point Likert scale, and they were asking respondents directly if they appreciate recommendations from algorithms. For instance, the statement "I appreciate the recommendations provided to me by Spotify in Discover Weekly playlist". All of these statements were based on the framework from Thurman, Moeller, Helberger and Trilling (2019), however for the purpose of acquiring more information additional statements were created by the researcher in a similar manner, i.e. "songs recommended to me by Spotify usually match my music taste".   
	The first step to begin the factor analysis was to change the negative wording of statements for the purpose of conducting the test. In the set of questions regarding the algorithmic appreciation and aversion, there was one statement "I do not believe that algorithms can provide me with music that is fitting my preferences" that was reversed. The values assigned were reversed, meaning that, for instance, 1=strongly disagree, now has a value of 7. 
      The 9 items which were based on the Likert-scale, were included in the factor analysis with the use of principal components with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1), KMO=.72, X2(N=210, 36) = 1000.24, p < .001. The resultant model explained 67.0% of the variance in preferences toward recommendations. Factor loadings of individual items onto the three factors are present in the Table 2. The factors that were found are: 

Algorithmic Recommendations (M= 4.86, SD= 1.10): This factor was built on five items that are focused on algorithmic recommendations and respondents' opinions about them. For instance, statements included are; "songs recommended to me by Spotify usually match my music taste", "having algorithmic recommendations from Discover Weekly is a good way to find new music", or "I think that recommendations provided to me by algorithms on Spotify are predicting my music taste".

Media Recommendations (M= 3.92, SD= 1.32): This factor was constructed based on two items that indicate the extent to which people agree or disagree with statements regarding music recommendations from experts, media or journalists. The statements from this group are as follows; "songs recommended to me by media and music experts usually match my music taste" and "having songs recommended for me by editors and music journalists is a good way to find new music".

Friends and Family Recommendations (M= 4.80, SD= 1.21): The last factor was combined of two items that are based on statements regarding recommendations from friends and family. These statements are; "having songs recommended for me by my friends is a good way to find new music" and "songs recommended to me by my friends and family usually match my music taste". 

Table. 2. Factor and reliability analyses for scales for algorithmic appreciation and aversion (N=341)
ItemsAlgorithmic RecommendationsMedia RecommendationsFriends and Family RecommendationsSongs recommended to me by Spotify usually match my music taste.825--Having algorithmic recommendations from Discover Weekly is a good way to find new music.819--I appreciate the recommendations provided to me by Spotify in Discover Weekly playlist.820--I think that recommendations provided to me by algorithms on Spotify are predicting my music taste.743--I do not believe that algorithms can provide me with music that is fitting my preferences (R).540--Songs recommended to me by media and music experts usually match my music taste-.841-Having songs recommended for me by editors and music journalists is a good way to find new music-. 883-Having songs recommended for me by my friends is a good way to find new music--.864Songs recommended to me by my friends and family usually match my music taste--.875R2.32.17.17Cronbach's α.81.71.71
61.1.1.2 Algorithmic Satisfaction 
The user satisfaction regarding the algorithms and the content that they provide, can be viewed as the overall usefulness and happiness of the suggestions (Mehrotra, et al., 2019). To measure satisfaction of algorithmically created Discover Weekly playlists, the frameworks from previous research were used to state survey questions. Firstly, respondents were asked about their overall satisfaction with Spotify. The next question regarding satisfaction of Discover Weekly was based on the framework from Garcia-Gathright, et al. (2018). It was constructed as follows: "In general, how dissatisfied or satisfied are you with your experience using Discover Weekly?". It was followed by three other questions regarding the usability of Discover Weekly, with the use of a five-point Likert scale. In addition, the statements regarding satisfaction were added to indicate the degree to which participants agree or disagree with them. This section was grounded on the measurements used by Bakalov et al. (2013). For instance, respondents were asked to indicate whether they agree or disagree with following statement "most of the time I enjoy selection of music provided by Discover Weekly". 
      In order to organize and reduce the data, the questions regarding algorithmic satisfaction were divided into two sections. The first part included questions which directly asked participants about their Spotify satisfaction. The following section were focused on the Discover Weekly satisfaction. 
	In order to reduce and organize data, the first step was to analyse whether there is a relationship between overall Spotify satisfaction and Discover Weekly satisfaction. The relation between two variables was investigated using Persons correlation coefficient. The results indicated that there is a positive moderate correlation between Spotify and Discover Weekly satisfaction (r = .43, n = 210, p < .001). The following step was focused on the reliability of scales that measured how Discover Weekly predicts user's music tastes and preferences. The test indicated Cronbach's α = .82, which allowed to create new variable based on music taste and preferences predictions. Finally, the four statements regarding enjoyment of recommendations and whether they are a good fit to respondents' preferences were analysed with the use of factor analysis and reliability test. The two out of four statements had to be reversed i.e. "Discover Weekly playlists are not enjoyable to me" and "the suggestions made by Discover Weekly do not match my music preferences". The factor analysis with these four items, which were based on the Likert-scale and were included in the factor analysis with the use of principal components with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1), KMO=.80, X2(N=210, 6) = 440.12, p < .001, showed one factor thus the statements were combined into one variable that indicated  Discover Weekly Satisfaction. The resultant model explained 72.2% of the variance in satisfaction of Discover Weekly. The reliability test showed Cronbach's α = .88, and this variable was futured used to analyse the satisfaction of Discover Weekly playlist. 

61.1.2 3.3.3. Additional variables 
Additional variables were selected as they might impact the results of this research but also bring more insights regarding respondents. For this research, the additional variables are the demographic variables.

61.1.2.1 Demographic Variables
This category includes basic demographic questions that may influence or add more information to answer the research question. Therefore, participants were asked about their age, gender and nationality. 

61.2 3.4. Validity and Reliability
Reliability assures that the data will be gathered consistently, and validity ensures that the measures focused on what was intended to be measured (Babbie, 2017). As Neuman (2014) claimed, reliability is the consistency of the outcomes when the research is conducted in identical conditions. Moreover, scholars emphasised that there are three types of reliability. Firstly, the stability reliability, which indicates that throughout the time the outcomes from the survey will not change. The second validity is the representative reliability, which as scholar claimed, "is reliability across subpopulations or different types of cases" (2014, p. 212). Thus, it is an indicator that different groups of respondents would answer in the same manner. The last type is the equivalence reliability, which is applied when there are multiple indicators. It measures the same concept in the same way, however with the different set of items, which was also involved in the process of creating the survey (Neuman, 2014). Therefore, for the purpose of the study, the reliability analysis was conducted with the use of SPSS. The reliability tests for variables indicated the Cronbach's alpha above the minimum of 0.7, thus the measurements are acceptable and can be used in the analysis. For the variables regarding music diversity, the results of reliability tests were as follow; content diversity Cronbach's α = .72 and Discover Weekly content familiarity Cronbach's α = .80. For variables regarding algorithmic appreciation, the tests presented that algorithmic recommendations Cronbach's α = .81, media recommendations Cronbach's α = .71 and friends and family recommendations Cronbach's α = .71. Moreover, the reliability test showed that for variables regarding satisfaction the outcomes were as follow; Discover Weekly satisfaction = .88, and Discover Weekly predicts user's music tastes and preferences Cronbach's α = .82,
      On the other hand, validity reflects the authenticity of the measurements (Pallant, 2007). Thus, based on previous research and scales the concepts were guided on how to be measured. In addition, the sample reached over 300 respondents, which increased the validity of the research. Moreover, this size of the sample allows for better generalizations of the outcomes about the users of Spotify. However, as Prior (2009) argued when respondents are asked to estimate media consumption, they might not be precise, thus it has an impact on the gathered data about the number of hours respondents listen to music from Spotify. Moreover, the representativeness of the sample was affected by the respondents that were willingly filling in the survey, which could lead to self-selection bias. In addition, the scales to measure diversity, appreciation and satisfaction of recommended audio content, were taken and adapted from other scholars. As diversity is a complicated concept to measure with the use of a survey, the questions that examine overall satisfaction were based on the work from Tintarev, et al. (2017). To measure the preferences toward different types of recommendations, the framework from Thurman, et al. (2019) was selected to collect the most accurate information on users' perceptions of recommendations from algorithms, media or friend and family. As the satisfaction can be measured by its overall helpfulness and enjoyment of the recommendation (Mehrotra, et al., 2019), the several questions were stated to measure the overall satisfaction of Discover Weekly playlist. The majority of them were based on the framework from Garcia-Gathright, et al. (2018) and Bakalov et al. (2013). The questions built on the previously used frameworks increased the validity as it authorises the measurements. 
      Consequently, to enhance the requirements of reliability and validity a pilot version of the survey was pre-tested to assess how respondents understand and interpret questions and if they are clear to them (Neuman, 2014). Moreover, as Pallant stated, "a poorly planned and designed questionnaire will not give good data with which to address your research questions" (2007). Thus, the survey had to be pre-tested to understand if the structure is well created. As the pre-test indicated, there were some issues regarding repetition and understanding of statements. Thus, corrections were applied to make it more understandable and clearer for respondents. Moreover, an open-ended question where participants could give feedback was added.


62 Chapter 4. Results 
62.1 4.1. Hypotheses Testing 

62.1.1 4.1.1. Hypothesis 1
In order to test the first hypothesis: the heavy users of Spotify use the Discover Weekly playlist more than light users of Spotify, a chi-square test for independence was conducted as the most appropriate measurement to analyse the differences between heavy and light users of Spotify. For this measurement, the independent variable is the type of Spotify user and the dependent variable is the Discover Weekly usage. The chi-square test revealed that there are no significant differences between particular answers of Discover Weekly usage and heavy and light users of Spotify. The Chi-square test showed that type of users is not related to the Discover Weekly listening X2(N=326, 4) = 5.87, p = .209. Therefore, the first hypothesis had to be rejected.
      However, an additional analysis was conducted based on the perceptions of being heavy or light users of Spotify to study whether it might change the outcomes regarding music listening. To do so, the simple regression analysis was selected as it allows to explore the relationship between a dependent (continuous variable) and independent variable, based on the correlation (Pallant, 2007). For the purpose of running this statistical test, the perception of being heavy user of Spotify was selected as the independent variable, and the Discover Weekly listening as the dependent variable. However, to be more precise with the analysis, the values for a variable which measured quantity of times respondents listen to Discover Weekly were changed in regard to create continuous variable. Thus, when the answer to the question varied between 2-3 times a week and 4-6 times a week, the mean was used as an indicator. The new values were as follow: 0 = Never, 1 = Once a week, 2.5 = 2,5 times a week, 5 = 5 times a week and 7 = Daily. Linear regression with the quantity of time users listen to Discover Weekly playlist per week as criterion and the perception of being a heavy user of Spotify as a predictor was conducted. The model was found not to be significant, F(1, 336) = 2.73, p= .100, R2 = .01. The perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify has no significant influence on times respondents listen to Discover Weekly playlist (β= .09, p= .100).
      
62.1.2 4.1.2. Hypothesis 2 and Hypothesis 3
To begin the analysis of diversity of music provided by Discover Weekly, the first step was to elaborate on the responses regarding music diversity from the research participants. As the factor analysis indicated, there are two variables that are creating the diversity measurement; the overall content diversity and Discover Weekly content familiarity. The variable content diversity gathered data from N=207 of respondents where the mean of answers was M=4.82 SD=.95 and mode was equal to 5. These data indicate that majority of responses agreed to statements that Discover Weekly provides them with diverse content. On the other hand, the variable which presented the outcomes from the statements about being familiar with music and artists that are recommended by Discover Weekly showed that majority of N=206 respondents nor agree or disagree that algorithmically created playlist suggest them content that they did not know before (M=3.6, SD= 1.04, mode=4).
      To test the second hypothesis: the heavy Spotify users have a more diverse Discover Weekly playlist than light Spotify users, the independent-sample t-test was conducted. As it was mentioned above, it will allow to compare heavy and light users of Spotify and their perception of music diversity. Thus, the independent variable was the type of Spotify user, and the dependent variable is the music diversity. These two variables were analysed separately with the use of independent-sample t-test. 
      The analysis indicated that the differences in diversity of content between heavy users heavy (M=4.88, SD=.95) and light users (M=4.76, SD=.95) are not significant t(195) = -.88, p=.919. Because p > .05, it indicates that heavy users do not have more diverse content of Discover Weekly than light users of Spotify. Moreover, the second test also showed no significant results t(194) = 1.13, p=.344. Thus, there are no significant differences regarding familiarity with Discover Weekly content between heavy (M=3.51, SD=1.07) and light users (M=3.68, SD=1.00). Because, for both of these tests, p > .05, it means that heavy users do not have more diverse content of Discover Weekly than light users of Spotify. As these two tests indicated p > .05, it means that H2 has to be rejected, meaning that the heavy Spotify users do not have a more diverse Discover Weekly playlist than light Spotify users.
      As it was the case for the first hypothesis, the second was also analysed with the use of data regarding perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify. For this reason, the multiple linear regression test was used to analyse whether respondents that see themselves as heavy users of music platform perceive the recommended content by Discover Weekly differently. A multiple regression analysis allowed analysing the relationship between the dependent variable, which is continuous, and several independent variables (Pallant, 2007). In this case, demographic variables were included as additional independent variables in this multiple analysis to explore whether they influence the diversity of content recommended by Discover Weekly playlist. The first step to conduct the analysis was to code the demographic variables as control variables with values 0 and 1. Thus, the variable gender was coded 0=male and 1=female, the other options i.e. 'other' or 'rather not say', were coded as missing. The education variable was also coded into a dummy variable, where 0 = did not complete higher education, and 1= completed higher education. In addition, the age variable was used in this multiple regression analysis. 
      The variable which measures content diversity was selected as the dependent variable, and the perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify, education, gender and age were chosen as independent variables in this test. The multiple regression found to be significant, F(4, 194) = 3.11, p= .016, R2 = .06. The outcomes presented that the perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify has a positive significant influence on content diversity (β= .20, p= .008). However, the education (β= -.08, p= .266), gender (β=.08, p= .268) and age (β=-.05, p= .518) do not have significant influence on perceptions of content diversity of Discover Weekly playlist. 
      As the diversity of music was built on two variables, the same test was conducted to the variable regarding familiarity with the Discover Weekly content. The multiple regression analysis was conducted, where the dependent variable was the familiarity with the recommendations, and the independent variables were; the perception of a being heavy user of music service, education, gender and age. The multiple regression was found not to be significant, F(4, 193) = 2.01, p= .094, R2 = .04. Thus, the perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify do not have a significant influence on perceptions of familiarity with the recommendations from Discover Weekly (β= -.07, p= .318). Moreover, education (β= -.06, p= .396). and gender (β=-.00, p= .975) do not have a significant influence on perceptions of familiarity with the content that is suggested by Discover Weekly playlist. However, age (β=.17, p=.031) has a positive significant influence on familiarity with the content of Discover Weekly. Meaning, that the older users were, the more often they agreed they are familiar with the content recommended by the Discover Weekly playlist. 
      In order to analyse the third hypothesis: the heavy users of Spotify perceive Discover Weekly playlist to influence diversity of music more than light users of Spotify, a new variable had to be created based on the three items regarding perceptions that Discover Weekly provides diverse content. The Cronbach's alpha for this variable reached .78, meaning the reliability was acceptable. The frequencies showed that out of N=207, the majority of respondents agreed that Discover Weekly provides them with new artists, new music genres and new songs. The independent-sample t-test for the new variable indicated that there are no significant differences between heavy (M=4.87, SD=1.05) and light (M=4.84, SD=1.08) users when it comes to perceptions that Discover Weekly influence diversity of music t(195) = -.208, p =.440, and because p > .05 the H3 has to be rejected, meaning that the heavy users of Spotify do not perceive Discover Weekly playlist to influence diversity of music more than light users of Spotify. 	 
      Furthermore, the variable regarding perceptions that Discover Weekly influence diversity of music was also analysed with the use of multiple regression analysis. A multiple regression with the impact of Discover Weekly as a criterion, and perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify, education, age and gender as predictors was conducted. The model was found to be significant, F(4, 194) = 2.59, p= .038, R2 = .05. The analysis presented that the perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify has a positive significant influence on perceptions that Discover Weekly playlist influence the content diversity (β= .18, p= .016). Meaning that the more respondents perceive themselves as heavy users of Spotify, the more they perceive the Discover Weekly to influence the content diversity. However, the demographic variables indicated no influence on perceptions that Discover Weekly influence the content diversity, education (β= -.12, p= .119), gender (β= .07, p= .312) and age (β= -.02, p= .834).

62.1.3 4.1.3. Hypothesis 4
In order to test H4: the heavy users appreciate the recommendations of Discover Weekly more than light Spotify users, the factor Algorithmic Recommendations indicated the general agreement or disagreement that algorithms can predict music taste precisely. Moreover, the other two factors; Media Recommendations and Family and Friends Recommendations were also analysing if there are significant differences between heavy and light users. Thus, the three independent-sample t-tests were conducted to analyse whether heavy users appreciate recommendations form Discover Weekly more than light users. 
      The first analysis revealed that heavy users (M= 4.92, SD= 1.17) and light users (M= 4.80, SD= 1.07) do not significantly differ in regard to algorithmic appreciation of recommendations t(324) = -.10, p=.309. Thus, the p-value is higher than .05, the H4 has to be rejected, meaning that heavy users do not appreciate the recommendations of Discover Weekly more than light Spotify users. The following analysis was based on preferences toward recommendations from media or journalists. The t-test indicated that heavy users (M= 4.01, SD= 1.38) differ in preferences to media recommendations than light users (M= 3.87, SD= 1.52), however it is not a significant difference t(324) = -.93, p=.375. Thus, there are no significant differences regarding preferences on recommendations from media or media experts between heavy and light users. Moreover, the third test was conducted to analyse whether there are differences regarding suggestions from friends and family between users. The analysis revealed that amongst heavy users (M= 4.74, SD= 1.20) and light users (M= 4.85, SD= 1.21) there are no significant differences t(324) = .85, p =.703. 
	However, in the survey there was one question which directly asked respondents if they agree or disagree with the following statement: I appreciate the recommendations provided to me by Spotify in Discover Weekly playlist. Therefore, to answer H4, data from this statement was analysed with the use of independent-sample t-test to measure if heavy users appreciate the Discover Weekly recommendations more than light users. The analysis revealed that, heavy users (M= 5.06, SD= 1.57) do not appreciate recommendations more t(324) =-1.05, p=.610, than light users (M= 4.89, SD= 1.43). Therefore, the H4 has to be rejected, meaning that the heavy users do not appreciate the recommendations of Discover Weekly more than light Spotify users.
	Moreover, these three variables were analysed with the use of data regarding perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify and demographic variables. The multiple regression was conducted to analyse whether respondents that see themselves as heavy users of music platform and with different demographics perceive the recommendations from algorithms, media or friends and family differently. 
      Firstly, the variable regarding algorithmic recommendations was selected as the dependent variable, and the perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify, education, gender and age served as independent variables in this multiple regression analysis. The test was found not to be significant, F(4, 315) = 1.94, p= .104, R2 = .02. However, the perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify has a positive significant influence on appreciating algorithmic recommendations (β= .13, p= .023). Which means that the more participants perceive themselves to be heavy users, the more they appreciate the algorithmic recommendations. In contrary, education (β= .00, p= .947), gender (β= .03, p= .560) and age (β= -.05, p= .419) do not have influence on appreciating algorithmic recommendations.
      The following multiple regression analysis was based on media recommendations variable, which was the dependent variable in this test, and the perception of being a heavy user of Spotify and the demographics as the independent variables. The results presented a significant outcomes F(4, 315) = 2.41, p= .049, R2 = .03. The results indicated that the perception of being a heavy user of Spotify has a positive significant influence on appreciating the recommendations from media and journalists (β= .17, p= .004). Meaning that the more respondents perceive themselves as heavy Spotify users, the more they appreciate the recommendations from media and journalists. However, the education (β= -.01, p= .842), gender (β=.03, p= .547) and age (β=-.00, p= .944) do not have significant influence on appreciation on recommendations from media and journalists.
      The third multiple regression analysis was conducted with the dependent variable as recommendations from friends and family, and the independent variables as the perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify, education, gender and age. The test was found not to be significant, F(4, 315) = .99, p= .412, R2 = .01. Meaning that the perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify (β= .06, p= .324), education (β= .09, p= .134), gender (β= .02, p= .712) and age (β= .02, p= .804) do not influence the appreciation of recommendations from friends and family. 
      The variable that asked respondents directly whether they appreciate algorithmically created recommendations was also tested with the use of perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify and demographic variables. The analysis indicated no significant results F(4, 315) = 1.02, p= .397, R2 = .01. Thus, perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify do not have a positive significant influence on the general appreciation of algorithmically created Discover Weekly playlist (β= .11, p= .057). Moreover, education (β= .00, p= .950), gender (β=-.02, p= .708) and age (β= -.00, p= .966) also do not influence overall appreciation of algorithmically created recommendations from Discover Weekly playlist. 
	
62.1.4 4.1.4. Hypothesis 5
In regard to analyse the fifth hypothesis: the heavy users are more satisfied with the recommendations of Discover Weekly than light Spotify users, the means were compared with the use of independent-sample t-test. To accept or reject hypotheses two analyses were conducted. Firstly, the differences regarding satisfaction of Discover Weekly predictions about taste and preferences in music were tested between heavy and light users. Furthermore, the test compared differences between heavy and light users about the overall satisfaction of Discover Weekly. 
	The first test revealed that heavy users (M= 3.06, SD= .80) and light users (M= 3.13, SD= .77) do not differ in agreement or disagreement about satisfaction on recommendations that predict taste and music preferences t(195) = .66, p=.836. Because p>.05, it means that the hypothesis has to be rejected. Moreover, the second analysis of overall Discover Weekly satisfaction underlined that heavy users (M= 5.02, SD= .14) do not differ t(195) = .92, p=.437, than light users (M= 5.16, SD= 1.08). In both cases the p-value is higher than .05, thus the H5 has to be rejected, meaning that the heavy users are not more satisfied with the recommendations of Discover Weekly than light Spotify users. 
      For more detailed analysis of users' differences, the multiple regression was conducted with the independent variables as the perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify and demographics. The first test included the satisfaction of predictions regarding taste and preferences in music provided by Discover Weekly as the dependent variable. The multiple regression revealed that test is not significant F(4, 194) = .79, p= .533, R2 = .02. Thus, the perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify (β= .10, p= .196), education, (β= -.09, p= .218), gender (β= .05, p= .468) and age (β= .04, p= .607) do not have a significant influence on satisfaction of predictions about taste and preferences in music provided by Discover Weekly.
      The second multiple regression analysis was conducted with the use of overall satisfaction of Discover Weekly as the dependent variable and perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify and demographics as independent variables. The test was found to be significant, F(4, 194) = 3.25, p= .013, R2 = .06. The results exposed that education (β= -.22, p= .003) has a negative significant influence on the overall satisfaction of Discover Weekly, which means that people with higher education were less satisfied with the playlist. On the other hand, age has a positive significant influence on satisfaction of algorithmically created playlist (β= .17, p= .037), thus the older people were, the higher the satisfaction was with their algorithmically created playlist. However, perception of being a heavy user of Spotify (β= .06, p= .050) and gender (β= .11, p= .147) do not influence overall satisfaction of Discover Weekly playlist. 

62.1.5 4.1.5. Hypothesis 6
The last hypothesis aims to analyse the differences between users with different subscription models; premium or freemium. As the statistical analysis indicated, from N=341 participants that answered the question about subscription type, only 44 (12.9%) stated that are using advertisement-based Spotify access. On the other hand, 297 (86.8%) claimed that they have paid accounts on the music platform. Thus, to test hypothesis stated: users with a premium subscription model are more satisfied with the recommendations of Discover Weekly than users of a freemium subscription model, an independent-sample t-test was conducted. 
	The statistical measures indicated that premium users (M= 5.11, SD= 1.10) do not differ significantly from freemium users (M= 4.85, SD= 1.10), when it comes to overall Discover Weekly satisfaction t(205) = -1.05, p=.854. Since the p >.05, the hypothesis had to be rejected, meaning that users with a premium subscription model are not more satisfied with the recommendations of Discover Weekly than users of a freemium subscription model. 
	An additional measurement was conducted to examine whether there are differences between premium and freemium subscribers and perception of being a heavy user of Spotify. To do so, another independent-sample t-test was conducted. The independent variable for this analysis was the subscription model and the dependent was the perception of being a heavy user of Spotify. The test revealed significant results that premium users (M= 5.49, SD=1.51) perceive themselves as heavy users of Spotify more often than freemium users (M= 4.23, SD=2.06), t(50.147) = -3.91, p < 0.001.

63 Chapter 5. Discussion and Conclusions

This section is focused on answering the main research question of this master thesis and to present the central conclusions of the findings. Moreover, this chapter will elaborate on the results from the statistical analyses of the gathered information. Additionally, the limitations of the research will be presented as they are a fundamental reflection of the study. Lastly, this section will underline the recommendations for the future researchers that are interested in studying this or similar topic.

63.1 5.1. Discussion 
The overall aim of this thesis was to highlight the differences between users of Spotify and their musical diversity. Moreover, this study examined insights regarding users' perceptions of algorithmically created recommendations and satisfaction of Discover Weekly playlist. The statistical analysis from data gathered through surveys, presented many interesting differences, even though they were contradicting assumptions stated in hypotheses and concepts from the theory section. 
      The insights regarding heavy and light users on listening to Discover Weekly playlist did not indicate any significant differences. Meaning that heavy users do not listen more to algorithmically created playlist than the light users. These outcomes are contradicting the assumption made by Tepper and Hargittai (2009) who claimed that heavy Internet consumers use new technological tools more to consume new content. However, this research was conducted in 2009, which might be considered as not the most relevant indicator, as the average time spent on Internet usage increased since then. In addition, the perceptions of being heavy or light users were analysed. The statistical test highlighted that there is no influence on listening to Discover Weekly and perceptions of being a heavy or light user of the music platform. 

63.1.1 5.1.1. Music Diversity 
As the focus of this thesis was to indicate the differences between heavy and light users and their diversity of Discover Weekly, the analysis of data presented that there are no differences between these two groups of listeners. Hence, the amount of time users spent on listening to music through the Spotify do not influence the diversity of recommended music, which is challenging claims made by Prey (2017) and Tepper and Hargittai (2009). Moreover, the music diversity was a combination of two different items; the overall content diversity of Discover Weekly and perceptions of being familiar with content recommended by Discover Weekly playlist. The analysis for both factors showed that there are no significant differences between heavy and light users. Mutually, heavy and light users agreed that algorithmically created playlist provides them with diverse content and recommends them artists, songs and genres that they are not familiar with. These findings support the concept that algorithmically created recommendations increase the diversity of content as they facilitate the discovering of new music (Datta et al., 2017; Hosanagar, et al., 2013).
      Additionally, the analysis of perceptions that Discover Weekly influences the diversity of content indicated that there are no differences between heavy and light users. Both groups of listeners indicated that the Discover Weekly is facilitating the music discovering. Thus, it can be argued that the algorithms are recommending content, which is unfamiliar to heavy and light users of Spotify. This refutes the concept that algorithms keep listeners in filter bubbles, where they are exposed only to similar content (Dubois & Blank, 2018).
      However, when the perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify and demographics were analysed, the outcomes revealed differences in music diversity of Discover Weekly. The potential implication for that could be caused by respondents who indicated to listen to Spotify less than 18 hours per week, however, they stated they consider themselves as heavy users of the platform. Moreover, as it was previously mentioned, when participants are asked to estimate media consumption, they might not be precise (Prior, 2009), which may influence the results. Nevertheless, the analysis indicated that the more respondents perceived themselves as heavy users of Spotify, the more diverse is their music content of the Discover Weekly playlist. However, when perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify and being familiar with the algorithmic suggestions of Discover Weekly were analysed the results revealed no differences. Furthermore, the study revealed that when respondents perceive themselves more as heavy users, they perceive Discover Weekly to influence their music diversity more. These findings are again supporting the claims that tailored recommendations created by algorithms increase the diversity of music offered to listeners of Spotify (Hosanagar, et al., 2013). On the other hand, the demographics of users presented that there are no differences between education, genders and age on perceiving the diversity of music recommended by the Discover Weekly. However, age was found to have a positive influence on being familiar with the recommendations offered by Discover Weekly. This means that the older the respondents were, the more often they agreed to be familiar with algorithmically created suggestions.
63.1.2 5.1.2. Algorithmic Appreciation
As the analysis indicated the perception of algorithmic recommendations is not impacted by the number of hours they spend on listening to the music on Spotify. There were no significant differences between heavy or light users regarding appreciating algorithmic recommendations from Discover Weekly. In general, respondents claimed that they trust and rely on the algorithmic recommendations of Discover Weekly. This outcome highlights the approach of algorithmic appreciation (Logg, et al., 2018). Furthermore, when respondents were asked directly whether they appreciate algorithmic recommendations, the results presented that participants agree that Discover Weekly often match their music preferences and tastes. However, there were no differences between heavy and light users. These outcomes reflect what Castelo et al. (2019) pointed out that algorithms are increasingly efficient in making recommendations regarding music that is matching listeners taste. Nevertheless, these results are contradicting what Yeomans et al. (2019) claimed that algorithmic recommendations are built on limited information of the user and thus, do not match consumers preferences.
      In addition, when the perceptions of being a heavy user of Spotify were analysed the outcomes indicated differences between users. When respondents perceive themselves as heavy users of Spotify, they tend to appreciate the recommendations from Discover Weekly playlist more. Furthermore, the analysis of education, gender and age did not indicate any influence on appreciating algorithms. These outcomes indicated that overall users of Spotify appreciate recommendations that Discover Weekly suggests. 
      As Tepper and Hargittai (2009) suggested, people tend to prefer recommendations from traditional media and their friends more, than from algorithms. However, the overall results presented lesser agreement on appreciating recommendations from media and journalists in comparison to algorithmic recommendations. The results from the statistical test indicated that there are no differences between heavy and light users of Spotify on appreciating the media recommendations. Nevertheless, the analysis of perceptions of being a heavy user indicated that the more respondents perceive themselves to be heavy users, the more they appreciate the recommendations from media and journalists. In addition, the education, gender and age do not influence the appreciation of media recommendations. 
	The outcomes from the analysis of recommendations from friends and family indicated overall appreciation towards them. The analysis did not present any differences between heavy and light users. Moreover, there is no influence on perception of being a heavy user of Spotify, or demographics on appreciating recommendations from acquaintances. The results reflect the assumption that users appreciate suggestions from friends and family, however, it is contradicting the notion that listeners prefer these recommendations over the algorithmic suggestions (Tepper & Hargittai, 2009).

63.1.3 5.1.3. Algorithmic Satisfaction 
The statistical analyses of satisfaction of Discover Weekly exposed that there are no differences between heavy and light users. This is the case for both variables that measured satisfaction of algorithmically created playlist. Thus, the heavy users of Spotify are not satisfied more with predictions of their music taste and preferences, and overall satisfaction of Discover Weekly than light users. What is more, in general respondents indicated that they are satisfied with the recommendations provided by Discover Weekly playlist. Thus, the satisfaction of algorithmically created playlist does not depend on the quantity of hours users spent on listening to music on Spotify. However, the satisfaction of Discover Weekly is influenced by the precision of recommendations users receive (Garcia-Gathright, et al., 2018).
      Furthermore, the perceptions of being a heavy user were analysed. The outcomes presented that perception of being a heavy or a light user do not have any impact on the satisfaction of music provided by Discover Weekly. Moreover, the analysis of participants demographics; education, gender and age, indicated no differences when it comes to satisfaction of predictions of music taste and preferences. However, when the overall satisfaction of recommendations was analysed, the results revealed that there are differences between people who completed higher education, and those who did not. The outcomes exposed that people who obtained a higher educational degree are less satisfied with the music content provided by Discover Weekly. Moreover, age was found to influence the overall satisfaction of Discover Weekly. Hence, the older people were, the more satisfied they were with the algorithmically created playlist.
      In addition, the analysis of different subscription models and how they impact the satisfaction of Discover Weekly was conducted. The results presented that there are no differences regarding satisfaction of recommendations from algorithmically created playlist between freemium and premium users. Thus, the fact that freemium subscribers are interrupted with advertisements and have lower sound quality do not impact the satisfaction of Discover Weekly (Waelbroeck, 2013). On the other hand, the subscription model has an impact on the perception of being a heavy or light user of Spotify. The analysis showed that premium users perceive themselves as heavy users of music platform more often than light users. Nevertheless, the outcomes might be impacted by the larger number of premium subscribers (N= 297) over freemium users (N=44) that participated in this research.
63.2 
63.3 5.2. Conclusions
The main research question that was stated, asked to what extent does the diversity of the music recommended by the Discover Weekly playlists differ between heavy and light users of Spotify. In order to answer it, six hypotheses regarding differences between users were stated. The analysis of data indicated that there are no differences between heavy and light users of Spotify, when they are divided based on the quantity of time they listen to the music on the platform. Thus, all five hypotheses regarding heavy and light users had to be rejected. Therefore, the main assumptions that the more music is streamed over the platform, the more diverse and tailored the content is (Datta, et al., 2019), had to be rejected. Additionally, the sixth hypothesis that aimed to exposed differences between subscription models and overall satisfaction had to be rejected. Even though, the freemium subscription model limits the accessibility and quality of content that is streamed (Waelbroeck, 2013), there are no differences between premium and freemium users and their overall satisfaction of music provided by Discover Weekly and Spotify. 
	Even though the hypotheses had to be rejected and there are no significant differences between heavy and light users, this research exposed many additional insights, based on the perceptions of being a heavy or light user. For instance, the more respondents perceived themselves as heavy users of the music platform, the more diverse content they perceive to have. Additionally, people who see themselves as heavy listeners of Spotify tend to appreciate the algorithmically created Discover Weekly more. However, when it comes to the overall satisfaction of the algorithmically created playlist, there are no differences between users divided by the quantity of time, between users that perceive themselves as heavy or light, or between different subscription models. 
	Likewise, the gathered and analysed data exposed more general insights about users of Spotify and Discover Weekly playlist. Overall, respondents tend to perceive the recommended music content as diverse. These outcomes indicate that developed algorithms created by Spotify can precisely suggest novel and diverse content to its users. Additionally, there is a general agreement that algorithmically created Discover Weekly is a good way to receive music recommendations. Thus, people who are interested in expanding their music catalogues might use algorithmically created playlist for that purpose. Furthermore, the agreement on the overall satisfaction of Spotify and Discover Weekly was the case for the majority of respondents. This finding highlights the fact that algorithmically created playlist suggests listeners artists, genres and songs that match their music tastes and preferences.  
	Additionally, the research presented insights on respondents' overall preferences toward music recommendations. As Tepper and Hargittai (2009) emphasised, there are three main methods of receiving suggestions; from friends and family, mainstream media and new media and algorithms. While this study did not find any differences between particular groups of users, it highlighted the respondent's preferences on recommendations. As the survey exposed, people believe that recommendations from friends and family are a good fit their music taste and preferences. This reflects what Yeomans et al. (2019) stated, that people tend to search for recommendations from acquaintances as they know their music taste. In addition, respondents stated that algorithms have the ability to recommend music that they might be interested in. However, when they were asked regarding media preferences, the outcomes indicated lesser agreement that journalists and mainstream media can provide suggestions that fit their music preferences. 

63.4 5.3. Limitations
While this research presented many important insights regarding music consumption and how it impacts the perceptions of recommendations and diversity, it also has several limitations. First of all, the majority of data was collected from users of the Reddit platform, where they are actively participating in online discussions. As Tepper and Hargittai (2009), highlighted heavy Internet users are expected to use online tools and new media more, and Reddit is one of these tools. Thus, users often are perceived as the heavy users of the Internet, which impacted the outcomes, as they typically where the heavy Spotify users as well. Moreover, the survey was distributed on the Reddit groups that focused on music listening or specifically on Spotify. Thus, the outcomes from these respondents might be more critical in comparison to people who are lighter users of Internet and Spotify. 
      In addition, the distinction between heavy and light users was based on the respondent's estimations, therefore the data about the quantity of time they listen to the music might not be considered as the most accurate measure. Likewise, the world pandemic of COVID-19 might also have an impact on the quantity of time people listen to music on Spotify. Because data was collected during the restrictions where the majority of people was forced to stay home, respondents might consume more music weekly than before the pandemic.
	 Furthermore, the disproportion of premium and freemium users could have limited this research. As the results presented, there are no differences between these two groups, however, the significantly smaller size of freemium users could be the reason for lack of variety. Additionally, because the distribution of the survey was based on social media like Reddit and Facebook, it could be a reason for the imbalances of the demographics. Firstly, the majority of respondents vary between 18 and 34 years old (N=298, 87.2%), it could also impact the results, as they are more actively interacting with online platforms like Spotify. Moreover, as stated before, the majority of respondents were from United States of America (140, 40.9%), where the second largest place of residence was United Kingdom (31, 9.1%). These disproportions might be considered as the sample bias, as it presents the majority of insights from respondents of particular country.     
	Even though this research reached the meaningful rate of respondents that are using Spotify (359), the number of participants that do not use Discover Weekly was quite large (134, 39.2%). Thus, these respondents were excluded from the part of the survey regarding the perceptions of music diversity of the algorithmically created playlist. This could impact the results of this study. Therefore, for future scholars it would be advisable to extend the sample and to gather data from more Discover Weekly users, which can impact the outcomes.   	
63.5 5.4. Future research
Overall, this research showed that more studies are needed to explore algorithmically created Discover Weekly playlists. As this study exposed, there were no major differences between heavy and light users based on the quantity of time. However, more research could be done to expose whether different factors i.e. active and passive usage, have more significant influence on music diversity of Discover Weekly playlist. In addition, for the future researchers it would be advisable to distinguish heavy and light users on more precise measurement than the estimation of the time.
	Furthermore, this study focused on particular Discover Weekly playlist, where there are different algorithmic recommendation playlists suggested by Spotify. Thus, for future scholarship, the exploration of different playlists created by algorithms would be suitable to study. Moreover, this research could be expanded to different or all of the music streaming services. This research was based on Spotify and its users, however, nowadays there are multiple platforms that people use i.e. Apple Music or Deezer, that offer algorithmic recommendations. As Waelbroeck (2013) argued, the developments of technologies changed the way in which people listen and explore new music. Thus, constantly changing streaming platforms and how they impact society are a relevant phenomenon to analyse.
	The following reflection on future research was based on the comments regarding the survey. As this study focused on perceptions that users of Spotify have on the music diversity and algorithms, it would be advisable to change the method of research to receive a more in-depth understanding of this phenomenon. Several respondents reflected on the overall usage of Discover Weekly. Thus, the qualitative method of research would be fascinating, because it might expose many interesting perceptions and insights on the music diversity and precisions of algorithmic recommendations. Additionally, by conducting interviews, respondents can bring extra information, which was impossible to collect with surveys. 
	Lastly, this research was built on previous theories and measurements and could be applied to different media content. Thus, future research could focus on perceptions of different entertainment media i.e. movies or TV series, to analyse whether algorithms expand people's libraries or if they keep them in filter bubbles. Moreover, more studies regarding filter bubbles or echo chambers would be needed, as those are the factors that influence the diversity of content. For instance, it would be also advisable to research whether algorithms allow discovering more niche artists and music genres. In addition, studying if the algorithms help new artists to gain popularity might bring many essential information for the society, and especially performers. 
	Overall, this research aimed to present that different types of users might receive more diverse music content. Even though the results indicated no significant differences, optimistically the theories, methodology and reflections from this study can serve as guidance for future scholars.  


- 

64 References:
Aguiar, L. (2017). Let the music play? Free streaming and its effects on digital music
      consumption. Information Economics and Policy, 41, 1-14.
      https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infoecopol.2017.06.002
Arditi, D. (2017). Digital subscriptions: the unending consumption of music in the digital era.
      Popular Music and Society, 41(3), 302-318.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/03007766.2016.1264101
Babbie, E. R. (2017). The Basics of Social Research. Retrieved from:
      https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/0B_gRTYPb1bfxUnUxY3kzNG1VY1E
Bakalov, F., Meurs, M. J., König-Ries, B., Sateli, B., Witte, R., Butler, G., Tsang, A. (2013).
      An approach to controlling user models and personalization effects in
      recommender systems. Proceedings of the 2013 international conference on
      Intelligent user interfaces, 49-56. https://doi.org/10.1145/2449396.2449405
Boyd, C. (2019, November). How Spotify recommends your new favourite artist. Medium.
      Retrieved from: https://towardsdatascience.com/how-spotify-recommends-your-new
      favorite-artist-8c1850512af0
Bozdag, E. (2013). Bias in algorithmic filtering and personalization. Ethics and Information
      Technology, 15, 209-227. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-013-9321-6
Brennen, B. S. (2017). Qualitative research methods for media studies. New York, London:
      Routledge.
Bryman, A. (2012). Social research methods. New York: Oxford University Press Inc.
Castells, P., Hurley, N. J., & Vargas, S. (2015). Novelty and diversity in recommender
      systems. Recommender Systems Handbook, 881-918. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1
      489976376_26
Castelo, N., Bos, M. W., & Lehmann, D. R. (2019). Task-dependent algorithm aversion.
      Journal of Marketing Research, 1-17. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0022243719851788
Ciocca, S. (2017, October). How does Spotify know you so well? Medium. Retrieved
      from: https://medium.com/s/story/spotifys-discover-weekly-how-machine-learning
      finds-your-new-music-19a41ab76efe
Chun, S. Y., & Hahn, M. (2006). Network externality and future usage of Internet services.
      Internet Research, 17(2), 156-168. https://doi.org/10.1108/10662240710737013
Datta, H., Knox, G., & Bronnenberg, B. J. (2017). Changing their tune: How consumers'
      adoption of online streaming affects music consumption and discovery. Marketing
      Science, 37(1), 5-21. https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2017.1051
De Silva, M. (2019, October). Spotify is still the king of music streaming - for now.
      Quartz. Retrieved from: https://qz.com/1736762/spotify-grows-monthly-active-users
      and-turnsprofitshares-jump-15percent/
Dubois, E., & Blank, G. (2018). The echo chamber is overstated: the moderating effect of
      political interest and diverse media. Information, Communication & Society,21(5),
      729-745. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2018.1428656
Fink, A. (2003). A survey handbook. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781412986328
Flaxman, S., Goel, S., & Rao, J. M. (2016). Filter bubbles, echo chambers, and online news
consumption. Public Opinion Quarterly, 80, 298-320. https://doi.org/10.1093/poq/nfw006
Fleischer, R., & Snickars, P. (2017). Discovering Spotify-A thematic introduction. Culture
       Unbound, 9(2), 130-145. https://doi.org/10.3384/cu.2000.1525.1792130
Garcia-Gathright, J., St. Thomas, B., Hosey, C., Nazari, Z., & Diaz, F. (2018). Understanding
      and evaluating user satisfaction with music discovery. The 41st International ACM
      SIGIR Conference on Research & Development in Information Retrieval.
      https://doi.org/10.1145/3209978.3210049
Giese, J. L., Cote, J. A. (2000). Defining consumer satisfaction. Academy of Marketing
      Science Review, 4, Retrieved from:
      http://www.amsreview.org/articles/giese012000.pdf 
Goldmann, M., & Kreitz, g. (2011). Measurements on the Spotify peer-assisted music-on
      demand streaming system. IEEE International Conference on Peer-to-Peer
      Computing, 206-211. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/P2P.2011.6038737
Haim, M., Graefe, A., & Brosius, H. B. (2018). Burst of the filter bubble?. Digital
      Journalism, 6(3), 330-343. https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2017.1338145
Helberger, N., Karppinen, K., & D'Acunto, L. (2018). Exposure diversity as a design
      principle for recommender systems. Information, Communication & Society, 21(2),
      191-207. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2016.1271900
Hijikata, Y., Shimizu, T., & Nishida, S. (2009). Discovery-oriented collaborative filtering for
      improving user satisfaction. In Proceedings of the 14th international conference on
      Intelligent user interfaces, 67-76. https://doi.org/10.1145/1502650.1502663
Hosanagar, K., Fleder, D., Lee, D., & Buja, A. (2013). Will the global village fracture into
      tribes? Recommender systems and their effects on consumer fragmentation.
      Management Science, 60(4), 805-823. http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2013.1808 
IFPI. (2019). Music Listening 2019. A look at how recorded music is enjoyed around the
      world. IFPI. Retrieved from: https://www.ifpi.org/downloads/Music-Listening
      2019.pdf
Kamehkhosh, I., Bonnin, G., & Jannach, D. (2019). Effects of recommendation on the playlist
      creation behavior of users. User modeling and user-adapted interaction, 30, 285-322.  
      https://doi.org/10.1007/s11257-019-09237-4
Kim, J., Nam, C., & Ryu, M. H. (2017). What do consumers prefer for music streaming
      services?: a comparative study between Korea and US. Telecommunication Policy, 41,
      263-272. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.telpol.2017.01.008
Kjus, Y. (2016). Musical exploration via streaming services: The Norwegian experience.
      Popular Communication, 14(3), 127-136.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15405702.2016.1193183 
Kompan, M., & Bieliková, M. (2013). Context-based Satisfaction Modelling
      for Personalized Recommendations. 2013 8th International Workshop on Semantic and
      Social Media Adaptation and Personalization.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SMAP.2013.18
Kreitz, G., & Nimela, F. (2010). Spotify - Large scale, low latency, P2P music-on-demand
      streaming. 2010 IEEE Tenth International Conference on Peer-to-Peer Computing.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/P2P.2010.5569963
Kunaver, M., & Požrl, T. (2017). Diversity in recommender systems - A survey. Knowledge
      Based Systems, 123, 154-162. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2017.02.009
L'Huillier, A., Castagnos, S., & Boyer, A. (2015). Understanding usages by modelling
      diversity overtime. 22nd Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and
      Personalization. Retrieved from: https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01108990/
Logg, J. M., Minson, J. A., & Moore, D. A. (2019). Algorithm appreciation: People prefer
      algorithmic to human judgment. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
      Processes, 151, 90-103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.obhdp.2018.12.005
Longoni, C., Bonezzi, A., & Morewedge, C. (2019). Resistance to Medical Artificial
      Intelligence. Journal of Consumer Research, 46(4), 629-650.
      https://doi.org/10.1093/jcr/ucz013.
Matthews, B. & Ross, L. (2010). Research methods: A practical guide for the social sciences.
      Harlow: Pearson.
McCourt, T., & Zuberi, N. (2016). Music and discovery. Popular Communication, 14(3),
      123-126. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15405702.2016.1199025
Mehrotra, R., Lalmas, M., Kenney, D., Lim-Meng, T., & Hashemian, G. (2019). Jointly
      leveraging intent and interaction signals to predict user satisfaction with slate
      recommendations. International World Wide Web Conference Committee.
      https://doi.org/10.1145/3308558.3313592  
Morris, J. W., & Powers, D. (2015). Control, curation and musical experience in streaming
      music services. Creative Industries Journal, 8(2), 106-122.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/17510694.2015.1090222
Möller, J., Trilling, D., Helberger, N., & van Es, B. (2018). Do not blame it on the algorithm:
      an empirical assessment of multiple recommender systems and their impact on content
      diversity. Information, Communication & Society, 21(7), 959-977.
      https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2018.1444076
Nanou, T., Lekakos, G., & Fouskas, K. (2010). The effects of recommendations' presentation
      on persuasion and satisfaction in a movie recommender system. Multimedia Systems.
      219-230. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00530-010-0190-0
Neuman, W. L. (2014). Social research methods: Qualitative and quantitative approaches (7.
      ed., Pearson new internat. ed). Harlow: Pearson.
Önkal, D., Goodwin, P., Thomson, M., Gönül, S., & Pollock, A. (2009). The relative
      influence of advice from human experts and statistical methods on forecast
      adjustments. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 22(4), 390-409.
      https://doi.org/10.1002/bdm.637
Pallant, J. (2007). SPSS Survival Manual. Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Perkins, S. W. (1993). Measuring customer satisfaction: A comparison of buyer, distributor,
      and salesforce perceptions of competing products. Industrial Marketing Management,
      22, 247-254. https://doi.org/10.1016/0019-8501(93)90012-V
Prey, R. (2017). Nothing personal: algorithmic individuation on music streaming platforms.
      Media, Culture & Society, 40(7), 1086-1100.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/0163443717745147
Prey, R. (2019). Knowing me, knowing you: Datafication on music streaming platforms.
      Big Data und Musik, 9-21. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-21220-9_2
Prior, M. (2009). Improving media effects research through better measurement of news
      exposure. The Journal of Politics, 71(3), 893-908.
      https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022381609090781
Promberger, M., & Baron, J. (2006). Do patients trust computers? Journal of Behavioral
      Decision Making, 19(5), 455-68. https: //doi.org/10.1002/bdm.542
Qualtrics. (2020). How to create a great survey? Retrieved from:
      https://www.qualtrics.com/experience-management/research/survey-basics/
Ricci, F., Rokach, L., & Shapira, B. (2010). Introduction to Recommender Systems
       Handbook. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-85820-3_1
Schedl, M., & Hauger, D. (2015). Tailoring music recommendations to users considering
      diversity, mainstreamness, and novelty. The 38th International ACM SIGIR
      Conference. 947-950. https://doi.org/10.1145/2766462.2767763
Shaffer, V. A., Probst, C. A., Merkle, E. C., Arkes, H. R., & Medow M. A. (2013). Why do
      patients derogate physicians who use a computer-based diagnostic support
      system? Medical Decision Making, 33(1), 108-118.
      https://doi.org/10.1177/0272989X12453501
Slaney, M., & White, W. (2006). Measuring playlist diversity for recommendation
      systems. Proceedings of the 1st ACM workshop on Audio and music computing
      multimedia. 77-82. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1145/1178723.1178735
Spotify. (2020a). Company Info. Spotify. Retrieved from:
      https://newsroom.spotify.com/company-info/
Spotify. (2020b). What subscription do you offer? Spotify. Retrieved from:
      https://support.spotify.com/us/account_payment_help/subscription_options/subscripti
      nlevel/ 
Spotify. (2020c). For the Record. Spotify. Retrieved from: https://newsroom.spotify.com/2018
      1102/our-spotifycheatsheet-4ways-to-find-your-next-favorite-song/
Statista. (2020a). Number of Spotify monthly active users (MAUs) worldwide from 1st quarter
      2015 to 3rd quarter 2019. [Data set]. Retrieved from:
      https://www.statista.com/statistics/367739/spotify-global-mau/
Statista. (2020b). Global digital population as of January 2020. [Data set]. Retrieved from:
      https://www.statista.com/statistics/617136/digital-population-worldwide/
Tang, M. C., & Yang, M. Y. (2017). Evaluating music discovery tools on Spotify: the role of
user preference characteristics. Journal of Library and Information Studies, 15(1), 1-16. http://dx.doi.org/10.6182/jlis.2017.15(1).001
Tepper, S. T., & Hargittai, E. (2009). Pathways to music exploration in a digital age. Poetics,
      37, 227-249. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.poetic.2009.03.003
Thomsen, T. P. (2013). An economic analysis of online streaming music services.
      Information Economics and Policy, 25, 81-91.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.infoecopol.2013.04.001
Thurman, N., Moeller, J., Helberger, N., & Trilling, D. (2019). My friends, editors,
      algorithms, and I. Digital Journalism, 7(4), 447-469.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2018.1493936
Tintarev, N., Lofi, C., & Liem, C. C. S. (2017). Sequences of diverse song
      recommendations. An Exploratory Study in a Commercial System. UMAP '17.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3079628.3079633
Trefzger, T., Rose, M., Baccarella, C., & Voigt, K. (2015). Streaming killed the download
      star! How the business model of streaming services revolutionizes music distribution.
      Journal of Organizational Advancement, 7(1), 29-39. Retrieved from:
      https://ssrn.com/abstract=2587176
Van Selem, M., & Jankowski, N. W. (2006). Conducting online survey. Quality & Quantity,
      40, 435-456. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11135-005-8081-8
Waelbroeck, P. (2013). Digital music: Economic perspectives. Handbook of the Digital
      Creative Economy, Forthcoming. 389-398, http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2249690
Wlömert, N., & Papies, D. (2016). On-demand streaming services and music industry
      revenues - insights from Spotify's market entry. International Journal of Research in
      Marketing, 33, 314-327. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijresmar.2015.11.002
Yeomans, M., Shah, A., Mullainathan, S., & Kleinberg, J. (2019). Making sense of
      recommendations. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 32, 403-414.
      https://doi.org/10.1002/bdm.2118
Ziegler, C., McNee, S. M., Konstan, J. A., & Lausen, G. (2005). Improving recommendation
      lists through topic diversity. Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on
      World Wide Web. 22-32. https://doi.org/10.1145/1060745.1060754


65 Appendix A. Survey

Spotify and differences between users

Start of Block: Consent form
 
Welcome to the research study!  
   
We are interested in understanding the differences between users of Spotify and the influence of the Discover Weekly on music diversity. You will be presented with information relevant to listening to music on Spotify and asked to answer some questions about it.   
   
Please be assured that your responses will be kept completely confidential. Moreover, there are no risks associated with participating in this survey.  
   
The study should take you around 10 minutes to complete, and your participation in this research is voluntary. You have the right to withdraw at any point during the study, for any reason, and without any prejudice. If you would like to contact the Principal Investigator in the study to discuss this research, please e-mail: 507322kd@eur.nl.
 
 By clicking the button below, you acknowledge that your participation in the study is voluntary, you are 18 years of age, and that you are aware that you may choose to terminate your participation in the study at any time and for any reason.
 
 Please note that this survey will be best displayed on a laptop or desktop computer. Some features may be less compatible for use on a mobile device.
 
 Thank you so much for your participation in the survey, your contribution is very important to us!
1. I consent, begin the survey (1) 
2. I do not consent, I do not wish to participate (2) 

Skip To: End of Survey If QID39 = I do not consent, I do not wish to participate
End of Block: Consent form

Start of Block: Do you have an account on Spotify?

Q1 Do you have an account on Spotify?
3. Yes (1) 
4. No (2) 

Skip To: End of Survey If Q1 = No


Q2 Please type in the box below how many hours per week do you listen to Spotify, on average?
   ________________________________________________________________


Q3 Please indicate to what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements:
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)I perceive myself as a heavy music listener (1) 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. I perceive myself as a light music listener (2) 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. I consider myself a heavy user of Spotify (3) 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. I consider myself a light user of Spotify (4) 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 



Q4 Please indicate to what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements:
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)I use Spotify to play music in the background (1) 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. I use Spotify to play music that matches my current mood or activity (2) 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 45. 46. I use Spotify to quickly access playlists or saved music (3) 47. 48. 49. 50. 51. 52. 53. I use Spotify to discover new music (4) 54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 59. 60. I use Spotify to save new music or follow new playlist (5) 61. 62. 63. 64. 65. 66. 67. I use Spotify to explore artists or albums (6) 68. 69. 70. 71. 72. 73. 74. 
Q5 Please indicate, what is your favorite music genre (you can select more than one answer):
- Pop (1) 
- Rock (2) 
- Hip-Hop/Rap/Trap (3) 
- Electronic (4) 
- Techno (5) 
- House (6) 
- Latin (7) 
- Soul/Blues (8) 
- Classical/Opera (9) 
- R&B (10) 
- Punk (11) 
- Indie Rock (12) 
- Country (13) 
- Metal (14) 
- Other (please type) (15) ________________________________________________

Q6 How often do you listen to the music from the Discover Weekly playlist on Spotify?
75. Daily (1) 
76. 4-6 times a week (2) 
77. 2-3 times a week (3) 
78. Once a week (4) 
79. Never (5) 


Display This Question:
   If Q6 != Never

Q7 Please indicate to what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements:
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)I listen to Discover Weekly to play music in the background (1) 80. 81. 82. 83. 84. 85. 86. I listen to Discover Weekly to discover new music (2) 87. 88. 89. 90. 91. 92. 93. I listen to Discover Weekly to explore artists or albums (3) 94. 95. 96. 97. 98. 99. 100. 

End of Block: Do you have an account on Spotify?

Start of Block: Music Diversity
Display This Question:
   If Q6 != Never

Q8 Please indicate to what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements:
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)Music provided by Discover Weekly consists of a good variety of songs (1) 101. 102. 103. 104. 105. 106. 107. Music provided by Discover Weekly consists of a good variety of music genres (2) 108. 109. 110. 111. 112. 113. 114. Music provided by Discover Weekly consists of a good variety of artists (3) 115. 116. 117. 118. 119. 120. 121. 

Display This Question:
   If Q6 != Never

Q9 Please indicate to what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements:
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)I am often familiar with the songs that are suggested to me by Discover Weekly (1) 122. 123. 124. 125. 126. 127. 128. Discover Weekly provides me with music content that I do not recognize (2) 129. 130. 131. 132. 133. 134. 135. I am often familiar with the artists that are suggested to me by Discover Weekly (3) 136. 137. 138. 139. 140. 141. 142. Discover Weekly provides me with artists that I do not recognize (4) 143. 144. 145. 146. 147. 148. 149. Content that is recommended by Discover Weekly allows me to discover new songs (5) 150. 151. 152. 153. 154. 155. 156. Content that is recommended by Discover Weekly allows me to explore new music genres (6) 157. 158. 159. 160. 161. 162. 163. Content that is recommended by Discover Weekly allows me to explore new music artists (7) 164. 165. 166. 167. 168. 169. 170. I think that Discover Weekly provides me with diverse content (8) 171. 172. 173. 174. 175. 176. 177. The artists I see on Discover Weekly and my music on Spotify are different (9) 178. 179. 180. 181. 182. 183. 184. I see a variety of music genres between my music on Spotify and Discover Weekly recommendations (10) 185. 186. 187. 188. 189. 190. 191. 

End of Block: Music Diversity

Start of Block: Algorithmic Appreciation and Aversion

Q10 Please indicate to what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements:
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)Songs recommended to me by my friends and family usually match my music taste (8) 192. 193. 194. 195. 196. 197. 198. Songs recommended to me by media and music experts usually match my music taste (9) 199. 200. 201. 202. 203. 204. 205. Songs recommended to me by Spotify usually match my music taste (10) 206. 207. 208. 209. 210. 211. 212. 



Q11 Please indicate to what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements:
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)Having algorithmic recommendations from Discover Weekly is a good way to find new music (1) 213. 214. 215. 216. 217. 218. 219. Having songs recommended for me by editors and music journalists is a good way to find new music (2) 220. 221. 222. 223. 224. 225. 226. Having songs recommended for me by my friends is a good way to find new music (3) 227. 228. 229. 230. 231. 232. 233. 



Q12 Please indicate to what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements:
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)I appreciate the recommendations provided to me by Spotify in Discover Weekly playlist (1) 234. 235. 236. 237. 238. 239. 240. I think that recommendations provided to me by algorithms on Spotify are predicting my music taste (2) 241. 242. 243. 244. 245. 246. 247. I do not believe that algorithms can provide me with music that is fitting my preferences (3) 248. 249. 250. 251. 252. 253. 254. 
End of Block: Algorithmic Appreciation and Aversion

Start of Block: Algorithmic Satisfaction

Q13 In general, how dissatisfied or satisfied are you with your experience using Spotify to listen to the music? 
255. Extremely dissatisfied (8) 
256. Somewhat dissatisfied (9) 
257. Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied (10) 
258. Somewhat satisfied (11) 
259. Extremely satisfied (12) 


Display This Question:
   If Q6 != Never

Q14 In general, how dissatisfied or satisfied are you with your experience using Discover Weekly? 
260. Extremely dissatisfied (8) 
261. Somewhat dissatisfied (9) 
262. Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied (10) 
263. Somewhat satisfied (11) 
264. Extremely satisfied (12) 

Display This Question:
   If Q6 != Never

Q15 How well or poorly does Discover Weekly playlist meet your music needs? 
265. Not well at all (1) 
266. Slightly well (2) 
267. Moderately well (3) 
268. Very well (4) 
269. Extremely well (5) 
Display This Question:
   If Q6 != Never

Q16 How well or poorly does Discover Weekly playlist match your music tastes?  				 			 		
270. Not well at all (1) 
271. Slightly well (2) 
272. Moderately well (3) 
273. Very well (4) 
274. Extremely well (5) 

Display This Question:
   If Q6 != Never
Q17 Please indicate to what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements:
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)Most of the time I enjoy the selection of music provided by Discover Weekly (1) 275. 276. 277. 278. 279. 280. 281. Discover Weekly playlists are not enjoyable to me (2) 282. 283. 284. 285. 286. 287. 288. The recommendations by Discover Weekly usually are a good fit for my taste (3) 289. 290. 291. 292. 293. 294. 295. The suggestions made by Discover Weekly do not match my music preferences (4) 296. 297. 298. 299. 300. 301. 302. 
End of Block: Algorithmic Satisfaction

Start of Block: Demographics

Q18 Which type of subscription to Spotify do you have?
303. Freemium (advertisement based) (1) 
304. Premium (paid subscription) (2) 

Q19 What is your gender?
305. Male (1) 
306. Female (2) 
307. Other (3) 
308. Rather not say (4) 

Q20 What is your year of birth?
   ________________________________________________________________


Q21 In which country do you currently reside?
▼ Afghanistan (1) ... Zimbabwe (1357)

Q22 What is the highest level of school you have completed or the highest degree you have received? 
309. Less than high school degree (1) 
310. High school graduate (high school diploma or equivalent including GED) (2) 
311. Some college but no degree (3) 
312. Associate degree in college (2-year) (4) 
313. Bachelor's degree in college (4-year) (5) 
314. Master's degree (6) 
315. Doctoral degree (7) 
316. Professional degree (JD, MD) (8) 


Q23 Do you have any comments, questions, or concerns regarding this survey? (answering is optional)
   ________________________________________________________________
   ________________________________________________________________
   ________________________________________________________________
   ________________________________________________________________
   ________________________________________________________________

End of Block: Demographics



 Racial discrimination on online second-hand shopping platforms
An Experimental Study on the Influence of Skin Colour on Consumer Interaction




























Student name: 		Sylvana van Beek
Student number: 		540042

Supervisor:			Dr. J. Gonçalves


Master Media and Creative Industries
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication 
Erasmus University Rotterdam 

Master Thesis
25th of June, 2021

Preface
In the summer of 2020 I attended the peaceful demonstration on the Dam Square in Amsterdam that was organised to create awareness on police brutality and systemic racism. Feeling overwhelmed and emotional standing there it became clear to me that I wanted to start the conversation on racism as well as dive deeper into the subject. I wanted to learn more about racism, listen to people's experiences, explain to others what I have learnt, share my thoughts, and even contribute to this topic academically. Starting the Master's program I dedicated multiple papers to racial discrimination. When having to decide on a topic for the Master thesis, I was sure that I wanted to work on a project that is of importance for our society. I am very thankful that I was selected to work on this particular thesis. I have learnt a lot from it and I appreciate that I got to research such a valuable topic. I hope my contribution to the literature on racism will have an impact on others, make people think, and open other people's eyes.												I would like to acknowledge and give special thanks to my supervisor Dr. J. Gonçalves for guiding and helping me through the whole process of writing this Master thesis. He has been of great help, supported me where needed, and he has taught me a lot about quantitative research. I am very thankful for having him as my supervisor. For the theoretical insights regarding the topic of racism, I would like to thank Dr. J. van Sterkenburg for advising me about literature regarding racism and insights about these literary topics. Furthermore, I would like to thank Nicolette Lazarus for her contribution to this thesis. She has been of great help and supported me in getting the tools I needed: the clothes used for the study, the models, and she helped sending out the packages to actual Vinted buyers. I really appreciate all of the time and effort she put into this study. Then I would like to thank John Olivieira for his contribution to recruiting the models and connecting this great group of people in order to start this research project. Lastly, I would like to thank all of the brands that contributed to this study: Adidas, Calvin Klein, Nike, Stieglitz, TOMS, and Tommy Hilfiger. Without their generosity of providing this research real clothes, this study would not have been such a success! 





Abstract
      The death of George Floyd on May 25th 2020 has created a lot of debate regarding the topic of systemic racism throughout the world (Oriola & Knight, 2020). Systemic racism is deeply ingrained in our society and it occurs on many levels: the individual level, the institutional level, and the cultural level (Bowser, 2017). The existence of systemic racism limits the quality of life for many different communities. As of today, in contemporary society, racism has become more covert in real life than it used to be. However, this is quite different on the Internet. On the web, individuals more easily act out and express their racist beliefs and thoughts (Ortiz, 2020). Previous studies found that online racism limits opportunities for people of colour, for example on online marketplaces (Edelman et al., 2017; Ge et al., 2020; McLaughin, 2018). With platforms whereon you can sell your own clothes - such as Vinted and Depop - becoming more popular these days, the question arose whether the skin colour of users of these platforms has an influence on how others interact with them. Do black sellers receive lower price bids than white sellers? Or do white sellers gain more interaction with their items than black sellers?						Considering the above, a research question was formulated. The research question this study gives an answer to is as follows: "To what extent does a model's race have an influence on consumer interaction with clothes on sale on online second-hand shopping platforms?" In order to answer this particular question an experimental research design was created and executed. The experimental research design includes two types of experiments: an online field experiment on Vinted and an online experimental survey created with Qualtrics. Both experiments focus on whether the skin colour of a model has an effect on how individuals interact with the clothes they see, either on Vinted or in the online experimental survey. 		The results of the experiments suggest that, statistically, skin colour does not have a major significant effect on the consumer interaction with clothes on sale on online second-hand fashion platforms. However, one important finding did indicate the existence of unconscious biases among respondents of the online experimental survey. It can thus be concluded that a model's skin colour does have a small effect on how individuals interact with clothes sold on online second-hand fashion platforms. This study shows that unconscious biases as well as racism are still prevalent in contemporary society. 

Keywords: Systemic racism, skin colour, unconscious bias, online second-hand shopping platforms, colour-blind racism.
66 Table of content
1.  Introduction	6
2. Literature review	9
2.1. (Systemic) racism	9
2.2. Colour-blind racism	11
2.3. Unconscious bias	13
2.4. Cyber racism	16
2.5. Racial discrimination on online marketplaces	17
2.6. Lack of diversity in the fashion industry	20
2.7. Conclusion	24
3. Methodology	26
3.1. Methods	26
3.1.1. Online field experiment	26
3.1.2. Online experimental survey	27
3.2. Sampling strategy and sample	27
3.2.1. Sample online field experiment	28
3.2.2. Sample online experimental survey	28
3.3. Procedure	29
3.3.1. Procedure online field experiment	29
3.3.2. Procedure online experimental survey	30
3.4. Measurements	31
3.4.1. Measurements online field experiment	31
3.4.2. Measurements online experimental survey	32
3.5. Ethical considerations	33
3.6. Data preparation	33
3.6.1. Data preparation online field experiment	33
3.6.2. Data preparation online experimental survey	33
3.7. Data analysis	34
3.8. Reliability and validity	35
4. Results	36
4.1. The interaction effect of colour-blind racism on price offers	37
4.2. The effect of a model's skin colour on consumer interaction on Vinted	38
4.3. The effect of a model's skin colour on price offers on clothes	40
4.3.1. Experimental online survey	40
4.3.2. Online field experiment	41
5. Discussion	43
5.1. Discussion	43
5.2. Conclusion	47
5.3. Limitations	48
5.4. Future research	49
7. Bibliography	51
8. Appendices	58
8.1. Appendix A: Images online field experiment	58
8.2. Appendix B: Images online experimental survey	61
8.3. Appendix C: Online experimental survey	62

List of tables
Table 1: Overview hypotheses	25
Table 2: Total interactions of black and white model	28
Table 3: Manipulation check, skin colour of the model	34
Table 4: Number of interactions black model	36
Table 5: Number of interactions white model	36

List of figures
Figure 1: Models of colour, New York Fashion Week 2015 - 2021	22
Figure 2: Visual figure of the hypotheses	25

List of abbreviations
BLM		Black Lives Matter
CoBRAS	Colour-Blind Racial Attitudes Scale
DV		Dependent variable
H1		Hypothesis 1
H2		Hypothesis 2
H3		Hypothesis 3
IV		Independent variable
US		United States
67 1.  Introduction
      May 25th, 2020 - It is already over one year ago that the world was shaken up by the death of the African-American man George Floyd. A video capturing the mistreatment of Floyd went viral on social media and many individuals got to see what happened to the man. The video showed how a police officer held his knee on the neck of Floyd even after the man begged for air saying: "I can't breathe". A few hours later, because of this brutal incident, Floyd passed away. What happened in the video created a strong public debate around the world regarding police brutality and the longstanding existence of systemic racism (Oriola & Knight, 2020). In the months that followed after Floyd's death, a long period of Black Lives Matter (BLM) protests took place (Gay et al., 2020). Most protests took place in the United States, but many other countries organised demonstrations as well to create awareness on police brutality against people of colour and systemic racism. 					A little longer than one year after Floyd's death, the police officer - Derek Chauvin - was charged for second-degree unintentional murder, third-degree murder, and second-degree manslaughter (Dewan, 2021). Around the world, a feeling of justice and relieve was found especially amongst communities of colour. However, the reality of systemic racism quickly took those feelings away as the world was exposed to new acts of violence against people of colour: Daunte Wright, Ma'Khia Bryant, and Andrew Brown Jr. (Bogel-Burroughs et al., 2021; Koettl & Kim, 2021; The New York Times, 2021). 			 		Racism is nothing new, it has been a problem for centuries and limits the quality of life for many people. In contemporary society, there are individuals that argue that racism is no longer a problem anymore, that racism is something that has happened in the past, and that there is no such thing as seeing colour. This way of thinking is referred to as colour-blind racism (Bonilla-Silva, 2017). However, the theory of systemic racism argues differently about the existence of racism in modern society. The theory states that racism is well-integrated in our society and that it is internalised on many levels: the individual level (e.g. attitudes and beliefs), the institutional level (e.g. government), and the cultural level (e.g. popular culture) (Bowser, 2017). The existence of systemic racism has led to individuals having racial (un)conscious negative or positive biases of others (Moule, 2009). Even though racism is not as overt as it used to be in the real world, another shift was found. The rise of the Internet has further resulted in different and more overt forms of racism, namely cyber or online racism (Bliuc et al., 2018). Most web-based platforms require individuals to create a profile including one's name and a profile picture. This easily reveals a person's personal characteristics such as age, gender or race. Levy and Barocas (2017) note that this information impacts users' online behaviour. It allows users to discriminate against one another intentionally or unintentionally based on (un)conscious racial biases. They argue that on online marketplaces users might refuse transactions, make less attractive offers, or evaluate others less favourably based on one's profile. As online shopping and second-hand shopping are more popular than ever, a few questions arose related to online second-hand shopping platforms: Does a model's skin colour influence the buyer's purchasing-decision? And, when selling clothes online, does one get higher price bids for the clothes on sale when the clothes are worn by a white model? 	Purchasing clothes online has become incredibly popular over the years. Besides the shopping platforms of commercial brands, new applications such as Vinted (21 million users) or Depop (18 million users) that allow individuals to sell their own clothes are growing in popularity (Depop, 2021; Vinted, 2021). Considering this, the existence of racial discrimination on such platforms is interesting to study. Therefore, this study aims to examine whether racial discrimination exists on these platforms. Thus, the research question this study focuses on is as follows: "To what extent does a model's race have an influence on consumer interaction with clothes on sale on online second-hand shopping platforms?" In this study's case, a model's race mainly refers to the skin colour of a model, focusing on black and white models. Consumer interaction includes multiple dimensions, including price offers on the clothes on sale, number of likes an item receives on an online second-hand shopping platform such as Vinted, number of views, and the time it takes till an item is sold.			Building on theories of systemic racism, unconscious bias, cyber racism, and racial discrimination on online marketplaces it is expected that racial biases limit the opportunities for sellers and buyers of colour on online second-hand shopping platforms. Several academics examined the existence of racial discrimination on online marketplaces such as Uber and Airbnb (Piracha, et al., 2019; Luca & Svirsky, 2020). These previous studies have shown that racial discrimination is a real issue on online marketplaces. Even though such studies are great contributions to the topic of racial discrimination on online marketplaces, they are different from this particular study as they are mainly service-oriented (transportation and housing). This study focuses on another industry and product-oriented online platforms whereon people buy and sell clothes. So far, no previous research was conducted yet on the role that race plays on online second-hand fashion platforms such as Vinted and Depop. However, the fashion industry has been guilty of a lack in diversity and being involved in racial discriminative practices on different levels in the industry (Baker, 2005; Fowler & Carlson, 2015; Lee, 2009; Millard & Grant, 2006; Reddy-Best et al., 2017). These racial discriminative practices and lack of diversity also point towards the expectation that black users on second-hand shopping platforms will be treated differently than white users. This particular study will therefore add to existing literature regarding racial discrimination on online marketplaces and expand the research focus to the fashion industry. Studying this problem will create awareness on racial biases and actual racism that might exist on these platforms. Furthermore, this study hopefully contributes to a starting point in creating a safe and fair environment for buyers and sellers on online second-hand shopping platforms.								In order to find an answer to the research question, this study consists of an experimental research design. In total, two types of experiments have been used: an online field experiment and an online experimental survey. The online field experiment was conducted on the online second-hand fashion platform Vinted. This particular experiment tested whether there are differences in the consumer interaction on Vinted between the profile of a black model and the profile of a white model. The online experimental survey was created and distributed through Qualtrics. The survey randomly assigned participants to 1 of 3 conditions: images of clothes with a black model (condition 1), images of clothes with a white model (condition 2), and images of clothes with no model (control condition). During the online experimental survey the respondents were asked what amount of money they would offer for a particular item. All 3 conditions showed the same clothing items.			Finally, this study is structured as follows. It first starts with a thorough theoretical framework explaining and reviewing important concepts from previous studies related to the research question. The literature review further introduces the hypotheses used for this study. The following chapter involves the methodology, discussing the methods used, the sample and sampling strategy, ethics, procedures, measurements, and data analysis. The chapter that follows focuses on the results of the different analyses. Thereafter, the final chapter includes a discussion, conclusion, the limitations of this study, and recommendations for future research.  







68 2. Literature review
	In this chapter, previous literature studies focusing on relevant topics for this particular study are discussed and reviewed. This chapter starts with a review on racism and systemic racism theory. After this, the notion of colour-blind racism is explained and is followed by a review on unconscious biases. Following, cyber racism, discrimination on online marketplaces, and the lack of diversity in the fashion industry are discussed. Building on previous studies, three hypotheses important to this research are introduced. Finally, a brief conclusion regarding the literature is provided including a summary and visualisation of the hypotheses. 
68.1 2.1. (Systemic) racism
      As defined by Bonilla-Silva (2015), racism is "the belief that some people are better than others because of their race." (p. 1359) Racism can be found everywhere around the world and exists in many societies (Macionis & Plummer, 2012). To further explain the notion of racism, Blum (2002) notes that racism can be divided into two themes. These themes are inferiorisation and racial antipathy. Racial inferiorisation refers to the treatment of the racial other as less. The second theme, racial antipathy, means a strong dislike of individuals or communities from a different race (Blum, 2002). According to Blum (2002),  racism often leads to the discrimination of the people that are seen as inferior. To clarify the concept of discrimination, Davis (2017) defines racial discrimination as the different treatment of individuals of a certain different racial group. Moreover, an important aspect to consider is that the notion of racism "can be marked by colour, ethnicity, language, culture and/or religion." (Grosfoguel, 2016, p. 10) However, as Grosfoguel (2016) argues, one's skin colour has been the dominant marker of racism over the past centuries. Racism is a result of racially dominant projects, such as apartheid, slavery, colonialism, and segregation (Bonilla-Silva, 2015). Overall, the term racism has been defined slightly different among scholars, however there is one aspect that most definitions have in common: the aspect of power dynamics. Davis (2017) argues that racism asserts a power dynamic in which a dominant group, which have often been whites, controls the ability to give or hold back opportunities, benefits, or resources to others. Davis (2017) therefore states that racism "serves to perpetuate systems of inequality." (p. 136)								According to Bowser (2017), racism occurs at three levels in society: the cultural, institutional, and individual level. At the institutional level, racism is internalised in important organisations or institutions of a society, such as the healthcare system, the government, (corporate) businesses, religious entities, schools, and the media. At the cultural level, the values and norms of individuals in a society are spread and portrayed through a society's literature, entertainment, and popular culture. At the individual level, racism comprises one's attitudes, beliefs, and behaviour based on biases, prejudices, and stereotypes. Additionally, Bowser (2017) argues that these levels are intertwined and that one does not occur without the other. This argumentation points into the direction that racism is deeply embedded in societies and its institutions or system, also known as systemic racism. The theory of systemic racism argues that racism is a deeply integrated societal problem. Systemic racism, also referred to as institutional racism, is the inescapable hierarchical system of racial oppression which is invented and maintained by white individuals and directed to people who have a different skin-colour (Feagin & Elias, 2013). Feagin and Elias (2013) argue that systemic racism is an ideological reality well-embedded in society and its institutions. The ideological nature of systemic racism has led to both racial conscious and unconscious biases. These biases mean that people quickly assess others in an either negative or positive way based on one's race (Equality Challenge Unit, 2013). According to the Equality Challenge Unit (2013) these biases are "deeply ingrained into our thinking and emotions" (p. 1). The biases, prejudices, or stereotypical beliefs individuals hold about people from a different race often lead to (un)intentional discrimination (Moule, 2009). The definition of systemic racism given by Feagin and Elias (2013) specifically focuses on the context of racial oppression in the United States. However, though less of a focus in literature regarding this theory, systemic racism is a construct that appears in European societies as well (Orsini et al., 2021). Several recent studies have examined the existence of systemic racism in European countries such as the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Germany, and Britain (Ducey & Feagin, 2021; Hayes et al., 2018; Malanda, 2021; Moffit et al., 2018; Naidoo, 2019; Orsini et al., 2021). As this particular study focuses on racism in the European context, these findings of systemic racism in Europe are of importance. The second-hand fashion platform Vinted is widely used in European countries and it is therefore valuable to research the extent in which systemic racism can be found on this platform. 							 			In addition, what is important to note is that the definition of systemic racism by Feagin and Elias (2013) is rather simplistic as it focuses mainly on "whites versus people of colour". As discussed earlier, racism is not only marked by one's skin colour, but by a person's culture, religious beliefs, language, and ethnicity as well (Grosfoguel, 2016). Therefore, racism should not only be seen in the narrow terms that it only exists between white individuals and people of colour. Racism can also occur among white groups, for example, Dutch individuals discriminating Polish immigrants in the Netherlands (Polek et al., 2009). Additionally, racism is not only reproduced by whites but can also be reproduced by non-whites. Therefore, systemic racism can be reformulated as an inescapable hierarchical system of racial oppression invented and maintained by a dominant group and directed to a minority group. These racial groups can consist of individuals with a particular skin colour, culture, country of origin, religious beliefs, language, or ethnicity. For the purpose of this study, however, the focus is on racism maintained by whites and directed towards people of colour. 												Over the years, systemic racism and racial discrimination practices have changed to some extent. Bonilla-Silva (2015) argues that racism and racial inequalities are still produced in systematic ways. However, in modern society, discriminating someone based on one's race is not a practice as overt anymore as it used to be. Bonilla-Silva (2015) argues that we moved from the obvious racist practices, such as the Jim Crow legislature and state enforced racial segregation, to a more nuanced or even invisible kind of racism. Bonilla-Silva (2015) calls this kind of racism the new racism. Bonilla-Silva and Ashe (2014) argue that there are five - slightly intertwining - elements that constitute this new racial structure. First of all, as indicated before, racial discourses and practices are becoming more covert. Secondly, an avoidance of racial vocabulary exists and white individuals claim that they often experience reverse racism, which is racism towards whites. Thirdly, when it comes to political matters, there is an avoidance of racial references when such matters are discussed. Fourthly, invisible mechanisms reproduce racial inequality, such as withholding housing or job opportunities for people of colour. Finally, the rearticulation of racial practices from the period of the Jim Crow legislature into more 'coded', implicit forms of racism make it harder for individuals to call out racist practices. However, these covert practices still uphold a system of racism and discrimination and thus limits the quality of life for people of colour. The following section discusses another form of racism which is predominant in our contemporary society.
68.2 2.2. Colour-blind racism
      "All Lives Matter", "My best friend is black and he is amazing.", "Today everyone can make it as long as you work hard enough." or "We are beyond racism." At the first glance, these phrases seem quite harmless and even positive or promising. However, each of these phrases is reflective of what is called colour-blind racism. In modern society, the most influential discourses regarding race and racial matters operate through a certain denial of racism and the belief that racism is something that has happened in the past and no longer happens today, while research actually shows otherwise (Bonilla-Silva, 2017). This denial of racism and the problems it causes is referred to as colour-blind racism. Colour-blind racism holds the ideology that racism simply is not a problem in society anymore (Ostertag & Armaline, 2011). In this age, some individuals admit that negative racial stereotypes, racism, and discrimination are still apparent. However, others actually believe that racial stereotypes, racism, and discrimination are not present in social discourses anymore at all (Haskell, 2009). This belief occurs because, as mentioned earlier, racism is not always as overt anymore as in previous decades (Bonilla-Silva, 2015). Bonilla-Silva and Ashe (2014) note that racial practices in the contemporary age are embedded in the operations and cultures of organisations and institutions, avoid racial vocabulary, and are invisible to most white individuals. The covert nature of the new racism mainly serves to uphold systemic racism with new, more implicit racial terminologies being used to cover up for the racist practices. Individuals upholding this new racism do not always contribute to any explicit claims stating that people of colour are inferior, but instead they argue that racial inequalities are a result of people of colour's own deficiencies (Beaman & Petts, 2020). These deficiencies would include a lack of education, laziness, bad parenting, or a wrong work ethic. This way, colour-blind racism actually secures the notion of white supremacy (Bonilla-Silva, 2017), which can be defined as a system in which white individuals occupy complex networks of resources and power, and hold (un)conscious ideas of white superiority and entitlement (Hylton & Lawrence, 2014). Thus, the new racism reproduces racism in a more covert manner (Bonilla-Silva, 2017).												In addition, Bonilla-Silva (2017) states that there are four central frameworks regarding colour-blind racism. These frames are as follows: "abstract liberalism, naturalisation, cultural racism, and minimisation of racism." (Bonilla-Silva, 2017, p. 54) Abstract liberalism refers to the explanation of racial matters in rather abstract and decontextualized ways (Bonilla-Silva, 2020). This framework is built on the ideas of political liberalism (e.g. equal opportunities) and economic liberalism (e.g. individualism). The naturalisation frame allows white individuals to explain racial matters by saying that they are "natural" or "biological" occurrences. For instance, one might claim that the notion of segregation is a natural process as individuals tend to move towards people of a similar race and similar cultural values. The frame of cultural racism argues that individuals attribute racial differences to cultural practices or avoid discussions around racial difference by referring to cultural differences that are widely seen as more acceptable. The minimisation frame suggests that racism or racial discrimination is no longer of influence on the quality of life of people or a factor affecting minorities' opportunities in today's society (Bonilla-Silva, 2017). Bonilla-Silva (2017) suggests that these four frameworks do not occur independently, but are used in combination. With these frameworks, whites try to explain racial matters, such as inequalities, racial minorities, or the lower quality of life for many people of colour. 		Just as with the theory of systemic racism many influential studies on colour-blind racism have focused on the US context. However, there are several studies that have found the existence of colour-blind racism in European countries such as the Netherlands, Belgium, Germany, and France (Beaman & Petts, 2020; Moffit et al., 2018; Naidoo, 2019; Ware, 2014; Weiner, 2014) The study of Weiner (2014) identifies the denial of Dutch individuals of being racist which can be linked to colour-blind racism. Other studies have also discussed the existence of the colour-blind ideology in France and how it negatively affects racial and ethnic minorities in this country (Beaman & Petts, 2020; Naidoo, 2019; Ware, 2014). These findings are of importance for the European focus of this study.				Colour-blind racism is not always easy to detect because of its covertness. Moreover, individuals who draw on a discourse of colour-blindness may not always recognize that they reproduce racism; this particularly applies to white people who do not usually have any experience with racial discrimination themselves (Bonilla-Silva, 2017). However, as noted earlier, colour-blind racism contributes to the perpetuation of racism. Even though individuals might not think of themselves as being racist or participate in racist practices, they are still able to reproduce racism. Considering this, H1 states that: 
H1: Those who believe that racism is not a problem anymore will bid less money for clothes worn by a black model compared to other conditions
68.3 2.3. Unconscious bias 
"In the blink of an eye, unconscious bias was visible to me, an African American. A man saw my face as I walked into the store and unconsciously checked his wallet. On the street, a woman catches my eye a half block away and moves her purse from the handle of her baby's stroller to her side as she arranges the baby's blanket. In the airport, a man signals to his wife to move her purse so it is not over the back of her chair, which is adjacent to the one I am moving toward." - Moule (2009, p. 321) 
      Moule (2009) starts his article by describing a few observed actions taken by strangers in regular settings. These small observations made by the author raises several important questions. Why do these individuals act in such ways? Were the actions of these individuals just some overall safety precautions? Or did the colour of Moule's skin (black) have something to do with the observed actions of the individuals? Moule (2009) answers these questions and argues that unconscious biases result in this kind of behaviour. The unconscious biases that the individuals hold, eventually lead to a concept that Moule (2009) calls "unintentional racism". Moule (2009) defines this term as "racism that is usually invisible even and especially to those who perpetrate it." (p. 321) A report of the Equality Challenge Unit (2013) states that unconscious biases are the unconscious associations or prejudices that individuals have regarding others which in turn influence our attitudes as well as our behaviour. The Equality Challenge Unit (2013) notes that every individual tends to have some degree of unconscious bias. These biases result in automatic responses to other people in a positive or negative manner. Furthermore, the Equality Challenge Unit (2013) argues that these unconscious biases are "deeply ingrained into our thinking and emotions." (p. 1) Additionally, Moule (2009) explains that our own unconscious biases are rooted in the existence of stereotypes and prejudices. As we live in a society where systemic racism has existed for many years and is deeply embedded in our daily lives, it is no surprise that racial stereotypes, prejudices, and thus unconscious biases exist among people. Moule (2009) states that: "Ethnic and racial stereotypes are learnt as part of normal socialization and are consistent among many populations and across time." (p. 322) To further support this statement, Noon (2017) argues that certain values and beliefs regarding race are so deeply ingrained in our attitudes and behaviour, "because they are learned in childhood, reinforced through peer groups and perpetuated through stereotypes in the media." (p. 201) 				A well-known experiment, the Clarke Doll experiment, has shown how stereotypes and certain values already exist during childhood. The 1954 doll study by Clark and Clark revealed the preference of children for white dolls over black dolls (Powell-Hopson & Hopson, 1988). Overall, the black dolls were described as "bad", "mean", and "ugly" by the children who participated in the study. On the contrary, the white dolls were classified as "good", "nice", and "pretty" by the young participants. The findings of this experiment illustrate how negative biases and prejudices towards black people already exist among very young children regardless of the children's racial background.					However, it is of importance to note that the doll experiment can be considered rather outdated. Therefore, recent scholars have replicated the experiment to see whether these biases on the level of socialisation of children still exists. For example, the study of Byrd et al. (2017) replicated the doll experiment and found that children these days are still very much aware of skin colour and race. Their experiment found that there is an increase in the self-perception of black children and their study found that the black dolls were also seen as "nice" and "good to play" with by both white and black children. Nonetheless, Byrd et al. (2017) did find that most of the children who participated in this study classified the black dolls as "mean", which indicates an (un)conscious bias. Even though the study reflected some promising results, Byrd et al. (2017) argue that an active anti-racist society does not exist yet as negative biases persist amongst children. Another recent US study, by Sturdivant (2021), found different and less promising results. Sturdivant (2021) wanted to conduct the doll experiment in a natural setting: observing the children without asking them any direct questions. Sturdivant (2021) found that the black dolls were chosen less frequently compared to the white dolls and that they were played with differently. More specifically, the children observed more often stepped on the black dolls, while the white dolls were treated with more care. Sturdivant (2021) concludes that anti-black biases are still dominant amongst children in the US. 												To place the doll experiment in a European context, in 2016, the experiment was recreated in the Netherlands. The experiment examined 159 Dutch children from different primary schools in Rotterdam and the Hague. The children were aged between 5 and 11 years old. In the experiment, it was found that the Dutch children - children of colour as well as white children - classified the coloured-dolls as "ugly", "dumb", and "mean" whereas the observed children more often classified the white dolls as "pretty", "nice", and "smart" (Veerman, 2016). This experiment also indicates the existence of racial biases in a Dutch context starting at a young age. As noted by Moule (2009), these doll experiments are of value because children's views tend to reflect the stereotypes and prejudices persistent in society. In addition, Moule (2009) emphasises the importance of individuals' awareness that they may have unconscious biases. When a proper awareness about these biases exist, individuals could more carefully consider their own responses and actions. The acknowledgements of unconscious biases and prejudices might help individuals to consciously work for harmony in society as stated by Moule (2009). 				However, not all scholars agree with this way of thinking (Blanton & Jaccard, 2008; Tate & Page, 2019). Although there is some scholarly consensus on the existence of unconscious biases, some scholars (Blanton and Jaccard, 2008; Tate and Page, 2019) are still critical about the notion of unconscious bias. Blanton and Jaccard (2008), for example, raise the question to what extent biases are actually unconscious. Some biases may be more conscious than we could expect from individuals. Blanton and Jaccard (2008) therefore suggest that we should exercise caution before assuming or suggesting that a person holds unconscious racial biases. Tate and Page (2019) are more critical regarding the concept of unconscious bias. They critically look at the word "un" in the prefix "unconscious". The word "un" is where the denial of racism regarding one's colour is maintained. The scholars argue that this word denies the possibility of someone having a conscious racial bias, and this way the term erases the possibility of racism. Tate and Page (2019) even refer to the notion of unconscious bias as "the acceptable face of racism" (p. 142). Furthermore, Tate and Page (2019) note that: "To overcome bias, an awareness of normalisation is insufficient; instead, what is needed is a more active process." (p. 145). They describe that knowing about racial biases does not automatically result in a change of behaviour of people. However, while this statement of Tate and Page (2019) holds an important truth, I believe the importance of awareness regarding unconscious biases should be a starting point as well. An active practice against racial bias cannot be achieved with a lack of awareness. 			
68.4 2.4. Cyber racism
"Many desire diversity, and yet too often reproduce racism. Some are careful in their speech, but bold and overtly racist online or in the back stage." - Burke (2017, p. 858)
      Due to the rise of the Internet and web-based platforms, a new type of racism has emerged: cyber racism, or also known as online racism (Bliuc et al., 2018). Earlier studies that focused on the Internet suggested that in online or web-based environments race and the physical markers of marginalisation would become obsolete (Lévy, 2001; Poster, 2001). This way of thinking extends from the idea that the anonymity that the Web offers makes one's identity a fluid entity. According to this idea, the Internet allows users to avoid physical markers or sources of marginalisation, such as a person's race (Kettrey & Laster, 2014). However, as stated by Kettrey and Laster (2014), the online and offline worlds are intertwined. Therefore, they argue, race and other physical markers of marginalisation do play a significant role in online environments. Some studies argue that the Internet, or the Web, grants white users greater power than it grants users of colour (Brock, 2005; Hargittai, 2010). Moreover, Ortiz (2020) claims that "covert racism never became hegemonic online." (p. 4) By this, the author refers to the problem that racist or discriminative practices are often more overt and clear in online environments. Kettrey and Laster (2014) believe the overt nature of online racism to be a surprising activity, because overt racism is considered to be a taboo offline. They further argue that when overt racism is expressed, it often happens in private settings with "white audiences". However, even though it might be surprising, the authors do note that the existence of overt racism in online settings can be explained. As the Internet offers individuals a sense of privacy or anonymity - whether this is actual or just perceived by individuals - it allows users to express themselves in ways that might not be socially acceptable in the offline world (Kettrey & Laster, 2014). The social barriers are slightly more blurred in online settings, following from a lack of direct physical contact with another person or group. Therefore, some individuals are more likely to say and express what they really think about something in an online environment rather than in an offline environment. Luca and Svirsky (2020) agree with this explanation and note that racism and discrimination occur more easily online because people feel less accountable and are less inhibited in online environments. An earlier study of Suler (2004) argues that anonymity is not the only factor contributing to Internet-users' disinhibition, which leads to racist practices or acting out on the Internet. Suler (2004) refers to the loosening up, the feeling of being less restrained, and the more open expressions of Internet users as the disinhibition effect. To explain this behaviour, Suler (2004) argues that there are six factors that create this online disinhibition effect: dissociative anonymity, invisibility (you cannot always actually see each other online), asynchronicity (most communication is asynchronous online), solipsistic introjection (there is an absence of face-to-face cues and online users usually communicate through text), dissociative imagination (the creation of "imaginary" characters online from which you can easily disassociate offline), and the minimisation of authority (there is an absence of authoritative features online). Besides these factors, Suler (2004) argues that individual characteristics of a person also play a role in the online disinhibition effect. 			Considering the factors discussed, it is no surprise that some individuals more easily participate in overt racist practices online rather than offline. The six factors that Suler (2004) discussed are also representative for online second-hand fashion platforms. On there, users can be anonymous, they do not physically see each other, communication is asynchronous, there is an absence of face-to-face cues, you can easily dissociate from your account, and there is an absence of authority on these platforms. Therefore, it can be expected that overt racism occurs on online second-hand shopping platforms such as Vinted as well. As online second-hand shopping platforms are considered to be online marketplaces, the following section dives deeper into cyber racism and the effects it has on online marketplaces.  
68.5 2.5. Racial discrimination on online marketplaces 				
      Usually, web-based platforms require individuals to create their own online personal profile or account. Online marketplaces as well as social media platforms normally ask users to set up their own account. Airbnb, Uber, eBay, Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook are all examples of online platforms that require a personal account. Moreover, online second-hand shopping platforms such as Vinted and Depop require people to create an account as well. These online profiles often include one's name and a picture of the owner of the profile. Thus, the accounts easily reveal an individual's personal characteristics such as age, gender, and even a person's race. Online marketplaces do not only contain information regarding products or services that are sold, but also information about the people who sell the products or services (Levy & Barocas, 2017). On the one hand, such personal information can facilitate trust between sellers and potential buyers. On the other hand, the availability of such personal information might also facilitate discrimination based on a user's age, gender, or race. The study of Levy and Barocas (2017) found that when users of an online marketplace platform are exposed to such personal information of others, this actually impacts their online behaviour. The existence of the online personal profiles thus allows users to discriminate against one another, intentionally or unintentionally based on (un)conscious (racial) biases. Moreover, Levy and Barocas (2017) note that on online marketplaces users are able to refuse transactions, make less attractive offers, or evaluate others less favourably based on the profile information of someone else available. Considering this and the theory of systemic racism, the question arises whether, depending on an online second-hand fashion platform user's race, a black user will get less favourable interaction than a white user? With this question in mind H2 states the following:
      H2: Clothes sold on Vinted by a black model will receive less interaction from Vinted  users than when sold by a white model
      Several studies have found evidence of racial discrimination on online marketplaces such as Airbnb, Uber, and Lyft (Edelman et al., 2017; Ge et al., 2020; McLaughin, 2018). To illustrate, the field experiment of Edelman et al. (2017) was able to detect that racial discrimination exists on Airbnb. They found that guests who created an Airbnb account with an African American name were 16% less likely to be accepted by the host compared to identical guests with a white-sounding name. Additionally, in the qualitative study of McLaughlin (2018), it was found that people of colour in the United States, such as African Americans, often experience discrimination on Airbnb when revealing a photo of themselves and using their real name. When changing these details, the participants of the study explained that they would be able to book a place much faster and more easily. These studies show that it is more difficult for people of colour to book a stay on Airbnb than it is for white individuals. However, it should be noted that it is not only harder for people of colour to book a stay at Airbnb, but it is also more difficult to earn money from the platform for them. Edelman and Luca (2014), for example, found that white Airbnb hosts in New York City are able to approximately charge 12% more than black Airbnb hosts for an equivalent rental. Their research shows the prevalence of discrimination in online marketplaces. 			To further elaborate on the topic of racial discrimination on online marketplaces, not only accommodation opportunities or the renting of housing is limited for people of colour, but transportation opportunities as well. For example, the study of Ge et al. (2020) found that users of Uber with an African American name receive ride cancellations more often than people with a white-sounding name. This way, the online profiles of Uber users limit or withhold these individuals from proper transportation services. 					Besides housing and transportation, job opportunities through online marketplaces are also affected by one's race. The study of Hannák et al. (2017) examined the existence of racial and gender biases on the online freelance marketplaces TaskRabbit and Fiverr. These platforms also require users to have a profile with their full name and a profile picture and this allows future employers to make inferences about one's gender and race. Their results indicated that race as well as gender significantly correlates to worker evaluations, which in turn could harm employment opportunities afforded to freelancers of colour. 			The study of Nunley et al. (2011) researched the existence of racial biases on the online marketplace eBay. The scholars conducted a field experiment in which they sold similar products on different accounts using racially identifiable profile names. They found an existence of racial biases in a natural online product market setting. For the products aimed at whites (e.g. white Barbie dolls) they found discrimination against people of colour. However, an interesting finding is that for the products aimed at blacks (e.g. black Barbie dolls), they also found discrimination against white individuals. This study shows that racial discrimination clearly exists on online marketplaces, but exists in both ways: white individuals discriminating people of colour, and people of colour discriminating white individuals. 											Lastly, another study that does not focus on online market outcomes, but rather market outcomes in general created a field experiment of selling iPods (Doleac & Stein, 2010). Some pictures included a hand of a person of colour and other images included a hand of a white person. The study found that black sellers of the iPods received fewer and lower price offers than the white sellers (Doleac & Stein, 2010). Considering the study of Doleac and Stein (2010) and the studies on discrimination on online marketplaces, it can be expected that on online second-hand clothing platforms black users will receive lowers price bids than white users. Therefore, H3 states that: 
      H3: A black model will receive lower price bids on clothes compared to a white model
	To conclude, all of these previous studies clearly indicate that racial discrimination exists on online marketplaces on the level of housing, transportation, work, and the selling of products. However, these studies specifically focus on services such as accommodation, transportation, jobs, and luxury tech products. No research studies have been conducted yet on the role that race plays in online marketplaces of online second-hand clothing platforms. Though, earlier studies (Baker, 2005; Fowler & Carlson, 2015; Lee, 2009; Millard & Grant, 2006; Reddy-Best et al., 2017) have indicated the importance of the fashion industry on racial biases, thus the following section dives deeper into the lack of diversity in the fashion industry.
68.6 2.6. Lack of diversity in the fashion industry  
      The fashion industry is one of the most successful, influential, and lucrative industries in the world. However, even though the industry is successful, it receives critique on many different levels: from unethical labour practices to sustainability issues, and from unrealistic beauty standards to racial discrimination. In this study, the focus is primarily on the critique of racial discrimination found in this industry. For decades now, the fashion industry has been immensely criticised for its racial discriminative practices (Newman, 2017; Reddy-Best et al., 2017). Cultural appropriation, racist advertisements, the notion of tokenism and colourism, stereotypes, and the clear lack of racial diversity in fashion campaigns, advertisements, and runway shows. These are all practices that the fashion industry has been argued to be guilty of. 													The influential and pervasive nature of the fashion industry is important to consider as it affects the values and norms of what individuals perceive to be desirable, attractive, or beautiful when it comes to the beliefs of what a person should look like (Yan & Bissell, 2014). All over the world, individuals are constantly exposed to media texts that transmit and reinforce norms, values, and ideals of beauty via images of models in a diverse set of media formats such as magazines and commercials (Yan & Bissell, 2014). For years, the European, or white, standards of beauty - a fair skin, light eyes, and straight hair - have dominated the imaging of fashion brands (Baker, 2005; Bryant, 2019; Newman, 2017; Wissinger, 2012). A result of these beauty standards is that the fashion industry is known for its long history of being predominantly white. Fowler and Carlson (2015) argue that whiteness as a concept of beauty is a global trend in the fashion industry. Catwalk shows, billboards, advertisements, commercials, design textbooks, and fashion illustration textbooks consist of mainly white models, and thus models who align with the European beauty standards (Baker, 2005). Because of this predomination of whiteness, people of colour have rarely been represented in the fashion industry for many years (Reddy-Best et al., 2017). This has led to a clear lack of diversity in the fashion industry on different levels of the fashion system.				An important level of the fashion system where a lack of racial diversity is found is in fashion magazines and advertisements. In the past few years, academics have extensively examined the representations of race in popular fashion magazines and advertisements (Baker, 2005; Fowler & Carlson, 2015; Jung & Lee, 2009; Millard & Grant, 2006). These studies consistently found evidence of a lack of racial diversity in fashion magazines and advertisements. The study of Millard and Grant (2006) analysed photographs that were selected from the well-known fashion magazines Cosmopolitan, Glamour, and Vogue. The researchers selected different issues of the magazines between the years 1999 and 2000. It was found that from 1999 to 2000 there was an increase in the representation of black models from 2% to 9%. However, even though their examination of the photographs showed an increase in the amount of black models used for these pictures, most images still predominantly featured white models. Furthermore, the study of Baker (2005) looked into the fashion magazines Cosmopolitan and Vogue as well. This study focused on the magazines' prints of 2002. The results of Baker's study indicated that a total of 88% of the models in these magazines were white and only 6% of the models were black. The remaining 6% was labelled as "other". Another previous study focused specifically on the models in advertisements in the fashion magazines Elle, Glamour, and Vogue (Jung & Lee, 2009). The authors of this study found a similar pattern: most models were white and black models were incredibly underrepresented. Jung and Lee (2009) found that only 4.5% of the advertisements included black models. Additionally, the representation of Asian models was even lower (1.2%). Finally, a more recent study of Fowler and Carlson (2015) analysed advertisements in the fashion magazines Elle, Cosmopolitan, Harper's Bazaar, Vogue, and Marie Claire in the US. This study found that 83.4% of the models represented in the advertisements were white, 6.5% of the models were black, and only 1.9% of models were Asian. Although an increasing percentage over time can be found when comparing these different studies, the representation of black models is still disproportionately low compared to the representation of white models. 												Black models have been represented poorly in mainstream fashion advertisements and magazines compared to white models. However, when represented, images tend to be stereotypical and it can be argued that these stereotypical images are negative representations. Black women have often been portrayed as aggressive or animal-like (Baker, 2005). According to Baker (2005), the most common images of black women in mainstream media can be classified as follows: the matriarch, the Sapphire, and the Jezebel. The Jezebel image of black women presents the sexuality of them as rather aggressive. While white women were often portrayed as more self-controlled and self-respected in their sexuality. The matriarch image does the opposite and portrays black women as mothers. Mothers who are either the head of the household or single mothers. The Sapphire image portrays black women as independent and headstrong. This image has been often portrayed in a comedic manner and not taken very seriously (Baker, 2005). 								Furthermore, to continue on the lack of diversity in the fashion industry, runway shows are also a crucial level of the fashion industry's system. On the runway, designers clearly show who should wear specific pieces of clothing and how. Over the years, runway shows of different popular fashion weeks have shown to lack racial diversity when it comes to models (Reddy-Best et al., 2017; Wissinger, 2012). As indicated in the study of Wissinger (2012), a full one-third of the fashion shows of the New York Fashion Week in 2007 used no models of colour at all. In the year after, there was an increase of 6%, but the runway was still predominantly white. The New York Fashion Week is the most influential fashion week around the world. Despite these findings, it should be noted that in the past few years, a promising change can be found in the New York Fashion Week. In a diversity report of the New York Fashion Week, it was found that from 2015 to 2021 there was a notable increase in the use of models of colour in the different runway shows (Schimminger, 2020). This increase is portrayed in figure 1 below.		

      Finally, another important level in the fashion industry's system is that of textbooks and fashion illustration textbooks. Professors, students, and designers use these kind of textbooks to learn more about the industry and its practices. According to Reddy-Best et al. (2017), such textbooks uphold ideals and ideologies of beauty "through producing and disseminating fashions, imagery, discourse, objects, and text surrounding and relating to the body, and how individuals and groups should fashion the body." (p. 1) These books can be considered to have great influence on the perceptions and practices of individuals who are studying to work in the fashion industry. Because of this, these textbooks should include racially diverse representations as this will promote equality in all parts of the fashion industry system. The study of Reddy-Best et al. (2018) addresses the problem that fashion illustrations in design textbooks are found to lack proper diversity. Often, fashion illustrations tend to be of white models. This is problematic as this shows how fashion designs are specifically aimed at white individuals. Such illustrations take into account the aesthetics of white individuals, leaving out the aesthetics of people of colour in the process. This way, people of colour are already excluded as a target audience for particular clothes. Additionally, Reddy-Best et al. (2017) examined a total amount of 3124 images of women in fashion merchandising, apparel, and design textbooks that were published between 2000 and 2015. In this research study the results also showed the major lack of racial diversity in the textbooks. Black and Asian models were hugely underrepresented in the books. 				Moreover, the study of Reddy-Best et al. (2018) argues that when individuals are repeatedly exposed to certain images in the media, this could have an impact on their self-perception and perception of others. Repetitive images consisting of particular ideologies and standards, such as the European beauty standards, can cause receivers of these images to believe this representation to accurately reflect reality. As claimed by Reddy-Best et al. (2018), the major absence of people of colour on different levels in the fashion industry's system creates an image that people of colour are of less value. Such images are troubling as they uphold ideologies in society of systemic racism. By making the fashion industry more racially and culturally diverse, a more accepting environment towards people of colour can be created. 												From these previous studies it can be concluded that racial diversity in the fashion industry is rather low. However, over the years, the fashion industry has seen a slow, but considerable change when it comes to racial diversity. As stated earlier, the New York Fashion Week is seeing an increase in the representation of models of colour in fashion shows. Moreover, changes in advertising of mainstream fashion brands such as H&M present evident changes in their representation of diverse races (Asare, 2020). Even though these are important changes, the fashion industry is still not at the point wherein it fully represents different cultures and races. The industry still needs considerable change to make the world of fashion a safe and accepting environment for all cultures and races. 				Lastly, as stated before, the fashion industry is an influential industry. It impacts the norms and values of what consumers of fashion perceive as desirable and attractive. Because of this, it can be expected that on a second-hand fashion platform such as Vinted and Depop these norms and values exist. Especially with the lack of diversity and representation of models of colour, Vinted users are expected to interact differently with users of colour on the platform. 
68.7 2.7. Conclusion 
      In conclusion, considering the theories discussed, racial discrimination in the US and Europe is still a major problem. However, in contemporary society, racism is often practiced in more covert ways than it used to be. In the US as well as in Europe a colour-blind ideology can be found, wherein some people assume that racism is not an existing problem anymore even though research indicates differently (Bonilla-Silva, 2017). The existence of (systemic) racism can be found at different levels in society (individual, cultural, and institutional), and in different industries. An industry of importance for this study is the fashion industry. This industry has been criticised for its lack of diversity and racial discriminative practices for many years, and it is therefore of value to research this industry. With the rise of second-hand shopping platforms, where people can buy and sell their clothes online, it is interesting to see to what extent racial discrimination exists on such platforms. As stated by Ortiz (2020), on the Internet or web-based platforms racism is more overt. This results in an online environment where people more easily, and sometimes more openly, discriminate other's based on their age, gender, or race. Therefore, it is expected that black users receive less interaction or lower price bids compared to white users of such online second-hand shopping platforms. 		Based on the discussed previous studies, three hypotheses were created that will be looked into for this study. An overview of the hypotheses can be found below in table 1. Additionally, in figure 2 you find a visual representation of these hypotheses. 
      
Table 1: Overview hypotheses
H1Those who believe that racism is not a problem anymore will bid less money for clothes worn by a black model compared to other conditionsH2Clothes sold on Vinted by a black model will receive less interaction from Vinted users than when sold by a white modelH3A black model will receive lower price bids on clothes compared to a white model 
 







69 3. Methodology
	In this chapter the methodology of this study is discussed. To start with, the methods used for this study are explained and justified. Followed by this, a summary is given of the sample characteristics and sampling strategy. After this, the procedures and measures of the two experiments are discussed. Then, several important ethical concerns are considered, followed by a discussion of the types of statistical methods used to analyse the collected data. Finally, the validity and reliability of this study are discussed. This chapter is structured in a way that it discusses both experiments separately. 
69.1 3.1. Methods 
      This study aims to find an answer to the research question: "To what extent does a model's race have an influence on consumer interaction with clothes on sale on online second-hand shopping platforms?" To clarify, this study explores whether a model's skin colour, and thus race, has an influence on the consumer interaction (see measure "consumer interaction" on page 32) with clothes sold on online second-hand shopping platforms. In order to examine the topic of interest, a quantitative research approach is the most suitable to use. Quantitative research is known for its ability to test or confirm a certain theory or hypothesis (Babbie, 2014). As the literature (Levy & Barocas, 2017) suggests that there is a possibility that one's race has an influence on how someone is treated online, this study tests whether this holds true on second-hand online clothing shopping platforms. To test the hypotheses, this study has an experimental research design. Experiments allow for the manipulation of an independent variable (IV) and measure their effects on a dependent variable (DV) (Neuman, 2014). Furthermore, an experiment allows the researcher to find causality between variables (Babbie, 2014). As this study aims to assess whether a model's skin colour has a causal effect on the consumer interaction with clothes sold on online second-hand fashion platforms, an experimental research design seems fit. With an experiment the researcher controls the IV, which in this case is the model's skin colour. This study conducted two types of experiments: an online field experiment and an online experimental survey. 
69.1.1 3.1.1. Online field experiment
      The online field experiment was used to directly examine the differences in consumer interaction with clothes being sold online based on a model's skin colour (black or white). The online field experiment was conducted on the second-hand clothing shopping application Vinted. Through Vinted, users can sell their clothes or search for and buy clothes (Vinted, 2021). Vinted asks users to create a profile including their name, country of residence, and a profile picture. This allows users to learn about other users' personal characteristics. This, as discussed by Levy and Barocas (2017), might result in prejudices and different treatment of users. Therefore, Vinted was chosen as a platform to perform the online field experiment on.
69.1.2 3.1.2. Online experimental survey 
      An online experimental survey was created to further test the hypotheses. The online experimental survey was not influenced by external factors such as the algorithms on Vinted, and was therefore higher in internal validity. The algorithms of Vinted could affect the prices offered for clothing since the ones that immediately gain many likes will be showcased more often to users than ones that get fewer likes. In the online experimental survey a similar amount of respondents were assigned to one of three conditions (black model, white model, or no model). In the end, the online experimental survey included a manipulation check to see if respondents were aware of the model's skin colour. The survey was high in internal validity, while the online field experiment was higher in external validity as it took place on an actual online second-hand shopping platform. The two types of experiments and the existence of internal as well as external validity complemented each other and makes this study high in validity.
69.2 3.2. Sampling strategy and sample
      The units of analysis for the online field experiment were the products sold on Vinted and the price bids offered for those clothes. To collect the data, different items were uploaded on Vinted. The researcher did not have any control on who saw the items and who interacted with the items. The experiment thus imitated the way that shopping occurs online. Therefore, the sampling strategy can be considered as accidental sampling.					For the online experimental survey, the units of analysis were individuals. These individuals are women living in Europe or who identify as European. As this study focuses on racism in Europe, this specific population was chosen. In order to reach the needed number of respondents, a combination of purposive, convenience, and snowball sampling was applied as a sampling strategy. For purposive sampling, respondents are selected based on certain criteria (Babbie, 2014). For this particular study, the criteria was as follows: (1) respondents should be female, (2) respondents should live in Europe or identify as a European citizen. In addition, convenience sampling was used as a strategy. Convenience sampling is the collecting of respondents, or data, which is most convenient for the researcher (Babbie, 2014). The researcher spread the online survey on social media platforms such as Facebook, Instagram, and LinkedIn. On Facebook the survey was shared in different Facebook groups related to European (second-hand) fashion fans, Vinted groups, and sustainability groups. A limitation of convenience sampling that should be considered is the possible bias in data gathering (Babbie, 2014). Lastly, snowball sampling was used to distribute the online experimental survey. This sampling strategy lets respondents recruit future respondents (Babbie, 2014). Individuals were asked to share the survey with others whom they believed to fit the sample as well. An important limitation of this strategy is that the researcher has no control over the distribution of the survey, who receives the survey, and who participates in the survey.
69.2.1 3.2.1. Sample online field experiment
	 In total, there were 5 items that created the most data during the online field experiment. Therefore, these items were the focus for analysis. These items are as follows: the Stieglitz trench coat, the yellow Nike shirt, the white Nike shirt, the multicolour Stieglitz turtleneck, and the orange Stieglitz shirt. In total, two data sets were created: one focusing on the items in particular and the second one focusing on the prices offered for the items. In table 2 below the total interactions received on the black model's profile and the white model's profile are showcased. 
Table 2: Total interactions of black and white model
Black modelWhite model	Views10331492Favourites 8499Number of price bids1619
69.2.2 3.2.2. Sample online experimental survey 
      After data cleaning, the online experimental survey recorded a total amount of 287 responses (N = 287). In this sample, the percentage of female respondents was 100%. The average age of the participants in this sample was 28.74 (SD = 10.20). The youngest person in the sample was 18 years old and the oldest 67 years old. In this sample, a total of 13 different countries where respondents currently lived were recorded. The most prominent appearing countries were the Netherlands (65.5%), Belgium (17.1%), and the United Kingdom (11.5%). In this sample, most respondents identified as white (83.6%), mixed (9.1%), or Asian (3.1%). Furthermore, 101 (35.2%) respondents were randomly assigned to the images of the black model, 91 (31.7%) respondents were assigned to the images of the white model, and 95 (33.1%) respondents were assigned to the control condition (no model).  
69.3 3.3. Procedure
69.3.1 3.3.1. Procedure online field experiment
	In preparation of the online field experiment identical clothes were collected with the help from the following fashion brands: Adidas, Calvin Klein, Nike, Stieglitz, TOMS, and Tommy Hilfiger. When all of the items were collected, a photoshoot with a black model and a white model was scheduled. During the photoshoot the models took pictures in front of a mirror wearing the identical clothes. For every item, five different photos were taken (see Appendix A). The models took the photos in the exact same way to ensure comparability, but in different rooms to make sure that Vinted users could not notice a direct relationship between the models to prevent suspicion. When suspicion arises about the items or profiles it could happen that Vinted users interact differently with the clothes which could impact the data and results.											After taking the pictures for the online field experiment, two different Vinted accounts were created. One account for the black model and one account for the white model. After the creation of the accounts, item descriptions were written that were used for uploading the clothes on Vinted. After all of the preparation, 15 identical items were uploaded to both the profiles at the same time. Unfortunately, some difficulties occurred related to the algorithms of Vinted. Due to the algorithms of Vinted, the account of the white model was blocked due to "suspicious activities" as stated by Vinted. These suspicious activities were most likely related to the uploading of the exact same clothes at the same time. Therefore, it was decided for to first focus on the profile of the black model. In total, 15 identical items were uploaded on the black model's Vinted profile. This Vinted profile was tracked for a total of 3 weeks, from the 14th of March 2021 till the 4th of April 2021. After the first week of the data collection there was a price reduction for the items on the 21st of March 2021. This price reduction was done to make the items more attractive to potential buyers. The earlier prices asked for the items were perceived to be too high in the first week. More interaction with the items was seen when the prices were lowered.							On the 11th of April 2021, a new account for the white model was created. With the data available of the black model, it was decided to upload the five most popular items (items with the most price bids) to the white model's Vinted account. These five items included the Stieglitz trench coat, the Stieglitz multicolour turtleneck, the orange Stieglitz shirt, the white Nike shirt, and the yellow Nike shirt. These items were uploaded on the white model's profile and after one week, just as for the black model's profile, the prices of the items were lowered. After one week, to ensure that the account was not blocked by Vinted again, some other popular items were added to the Vinted profile as well. The tracking of the data finished on the 2nd of May 2021.											To ensure comparability between the two profiles, the uploaded items were identical, meaning that the exact same items were used in the same sizes. To further keep both profiles comparable, the identical items were always uploaded on Sundays. Vinted gives users the option to describe the item and assign the item to particular categories: clothing category (e.g. women's dresses or women's shirts), brand category (e.g. Tommy Hilfiger), size category (e.g. S, M, or L), condition category (e.g. as good as new, new, or good), colour of the item category (e.g. black or multi-colour), and package category (e.g. it fits in a small package or medium package). The identical items were assigned to the exact same categories in order to ensure comparability. Furthermore, the prices of the identical items were also identically priced. Keeping the profiles as similar as possible, and thus creating comparability, makes the results of the online field experiment more accurate. 
69.3.2 3.3.2. Procedure online experimental survey 
	The online experimental survey was created with the use of Qualtrics. As the survey was experiment-based, to eliminate certain biases, the introduction of the survey did not explain the true purpose of the study. If the purpose was introduced already at the start of the survey this could create biases in answering certain questions, or respondents answering in a politically correct or social desirable manner. Followed by the introduction, a filter question was asked: whether the respondents identified as female, male, or other. If answered male, the survey ended. After the filter question, two questions were asked related to the respondent's awareness of or familiarity with online second-hand fashion shopping platforms such as Vinted and Depop. After this, the actual experiment started. The respondents were evenly and randomly assigned to a condition. One condition included three photos of clothes worn by the black model, the second condition included photos of the items worn by the white model, and the third condition (control condition) included photos of the items without any model (see Appendix B). The items shown to the respondents were identical and included a Tommy Hilfiger shirt, a Calvin Klein dress, and a Nike shirt. Respondents were asked to fill in what price they would bid or offer for the items shown to them. After this, some questions related to the respondents' demographics were asked. Finally, if the respondent saw the images of either the black or white model some additional questions were asked to them. First, how they perceived the attractiveness of the model and second whether they remembered the skin colour of the model (manipulation check). The experimental survey ended with a debriefing, first thanking the respondents for their participation and then explaining what the real purpose of the survey was (see Appendix C for the full online experimental survey). 			Before distributing the online experimental survey, it was first tested by 6 female individuals. A pre-test of the survey is essential in testing the structure of the survey, the wording of questions or items, and to ensure that the questions measure the phenomenon under study (Babbie, 2014). After the pre-testing phase, some minor adjustments to the survey were made. Finally, the experimental survey was published and distributed. 
69.4 3.4. Measurements
69.4.1 3.4.1. Measurements online field experiment
Consumer interaction. For the online field experiment on Vinted, consumer interaction included five sub-measures: likes, views, time until an item was sold on Vinted, the number of price bids, and the price bids. 
Number of likes. On Vinted users can give a "like" or "favourite" to clothes that they see. This variable includes the total number of likes or favourites given to an item by Vinted users. The more likes an item has, the higher the consumer interaction of the item. 
Number of views. An item that is uploaded on Vinted can receive views. The amount of views on an item was counted. The more views an item has, the higher the consumer interaction of the item. 
Number of days till sold. The number of days it takes for an item to be sold was tracked. This indicates the popularity of an item. The less days till the item was sold, the higher the consumer interaction of the item. 
Number of price bids. This variable constitutes the number of price bids on a particular item. The higher the amount of price bids, the higher the consumer interaction. 
Price bids. This variable is the price in euros Vinted users offered to pay for a certain item uploaded on Vinted. 
69.4.2 3.4.2. Measurements online experimental survey
Price bids. In the online experimental survey, participants were asked what price in euros they would offer or bid for the items shown to them. This variable constitutes these different price offers. 
Colour-blind racism. To measure to what extent colour-blind racism exists among the respondents, the Colour-Blind Racial Attitudes Scale (CoBRAS) of Neville et al. (2000) was implemented in the online experimental survey. This scale consists of 20 different items (e.g. "White people in the US have certain advantages because of the colour of their skin" and "Race is very important in determining who is successful and who is not."). From these 20 items, a total of 3 items were used as statements in the online experimental survey. The use of only 3 items was decided for, as using more items would make the survey too long. Furthermore, using more items would make the purpose of the study more explicit to the participants. If the purpose is too clear for the respondents this could result in biases or answering the questions in socially desirable manners (social desirability bias). Two of the items were rephrased to fit the European context of this study. The item "Racism is still a major problem in the US" was adjusted to "Racism is still a major problem in Europe". The item "White people in the US have certain advantages because of the colour of their skin" was adjusted to "White people in Europe have certain advantages because of the colour of their skin". The items could be answered on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Respondents who score low on this variable are more likely to have colour-blind racist beliefs than respondents who score high on this variable. Important to note is that in this study this scale is interpreted as a reverse scale. The variable's internal reliability in this sample is acceptable (Cronbach's α = .79). To distract participants from the true purpose of this study, in this part of the online experimental survey, 6 other unrelated statements were given to the respondents (e.g. "Climate change is a very serious problem around the world" and "The fashion industry should be more sustainable"). By adding these statements, it was assured that respondents did not immediately think that the online experimental survey was related to a study regarding racism. 	
Attractiveness. To measure to what extent the respondents perceived the black or white model as attractive the Source-Credibility Scale was used (Ohanian, 1990). The Source-Credibility Scale consists of three dimensions (attractiveness dimension, trustworthiness dimension, and expertise dimension). For the online experimental survey, the attractiveness dimension was implemented. The dimension consists of 5 items: attractive, beautiful, classy, elegant, and sexy. The items were formulated as a statement (I think that the model used in the images before is...) and could be answered on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). The higher the score, the more attractive respondents perceived a model to be. The variable's internal reliability in this sample is good (Cronbach's α = .83).
69.5 3.5. Ethical considerations 
	Due to the experimental approach of this study, some ethical considerations should be discussed. For the online field experiment, Vinted users were not aware of their participation in the online field experiment. If asked for their consent to participate in this experiment, the online field experiment would compromise the results. Therefore, to ensure valid data, Vinted users were not made aware of their participation in the study. Furthermore, all personal information that could make the Vinted users identifiable in any way is eliminated from this study and will not be shared. This is done to ensure that these Vinted users cannot be harmed in any way. 												For the experimental survey, respondents did give consent to partake in the study by clicking the consent button at the start of the survey. However, as indicated earlier, the true purpose was withheld at the beginning of the survey. Therefore, a debriefing was included at the end of the online experimental survey to explain the true purpose of the research. Furthermore, participants were ensured that their answers are anonymous and will only be used for the purpose of this study. Any information that could clearly identify a respondent is excluded from this study. 								
69.6 3.6. Data preparation
69.6.1 3.6.1. Data preparation online field experiment
      Every day, during the data collection phase, the data of the online field experiment was added to an online Google Sheets file. After collecting the data it was properly added to two separate SPSS files. For one dataset the units of analysis are the items and for the other data set the units of analysis are the price bids. 
69.6.2 3.6.2. Data preparation online experimental survey
      Different steps in the data cleaning phase were taken in order to prepare the data of the online experimental survey for the final analysis. After exporting the data from Qualtrics to SPSS, the first step taken was reviewing the data quality of the respondents' answers. This was done by reviewing the time in seconds that respondents took in completing the online survey. In SPSS the median amount of seconds that respondents took to complete the survey was calculated (Mdn = 188.00). Respondents that completed the survey in less than 40.0% of the median completion time in seconds were eliminated from the dataset. Their answers were considered irrelevant as they completed the survey too quickly. Elimination of respondents based on time, amounted to a total of 5 respondents. 						The following step in the data cleaning process was reviewing the data set on outliers. To do this, a closer look was given to the price bids on the three items. If people filled in words or Euro signs, these responses were converted to numeric values. After the quality control of the data, a chi-square test was performed to examine whether the respondents who were assigned to either the black or white model were aware of the model's skin colour (manipulation check, see table 3). The manipulation check was successful because the model's skin colour is significantly related to the skin colour that the respondents remembered, X2 (2, N = 192) = 173.55, p < .001. 
Table 3: Manipulation check, skin colour of the model (N= 192)
BlackWhiteI do not rememberTotalCondition: Black model   95.0%    0.0%    5.0%101Condition: White model    1.1%  84.6%  14.3%91Total  50.5%  40.1%    9.4%192Chi-Square173.55***Significance: ***p < .001 **p <.01 *p <.05

69.7 3.7. Data analysis 
      In order to examine H1, multiple regression analyses were executed. The reason for this is because the hypothesis includes multiple IVs: the skin colour of the model (categorial variable) and the level of colour-blindness of a respondent (continuous variable). For this analysis a dummy variable (IV) and interaction variable (IV) were created. The DVs were the prices offered for the three different types of clothes: Calvin Klein dress, Tommy Hilfiger shirt, and yellow Nike shirt. H1 aims to find which IVs have an effect on the DV, therefore a multiple regression analysis is the best type of analysis to use for this hypothesis. 		To examine H2, t-tests were executed. This hypothesis includes a categorical IV (the skin colour of the model, 1 = black, 2 = white) and multiple continuous DVs (views, favourites, number of price bids, price sold, and days till sold). A t-test compares the means of the variables to see if there are any significant differences between groups. Therefore, the analysis used for H2 were t-tests. 									Finally, to examine H3, ANOVAs as well as some t-tests were executed. The ANOVAs were executed using the data set of the online experimental survey and the t-tests were executed using the data set of the online field experiment focusing on the price bids of the items on sale. As the online experimental survey's IV (skin colour of the model) included three conditions (black model, white model, and no model) an ANOVA was needed. For the online field experiment the IV only included two conditions (black model or white model), therefore t-tests were needed. Both types of analysis compared the means to see if there are any significant differences between the groups. 
69.8 3.8. Reliability and validity 
	The reliability of a quantitative study depends on the consistency of a measure (Babbie, 2014). In order to ensure that an important measure of this study (colour-blind racism) is reliable, a reliability test was conducted on SPSS. This test indicated that the variable's internal reliability is acceptable (Cronbach's α = .79).					Besides the reliability of a study, the validity is of importance as well. The validity of a study refers to the extent in which a concept is accurately measured. It means whether a researcher measured a concept that was intended to be measured (Babbie, 2014). The existence of both internal and external validity makes this study high in validity. Internal validity refers to the extent to which a causal relationship is not influenced by other factors or variables. The internal validity was reached in this study by creating an online experimental survey. In this survey, other factors could not influence this experiment such as the algorithms on Vinted. Furthermore, the external validity was reached in this study with the online field experiment. As the online field experiment was executed on an actual online second-hand shopping platform the results can thus be applied to other situations, which makes the online field experiment high in external validity. 
      
      
      
70 	4. Results	
	In this chapter, the results of the analyses of the different hypotheses are given. This chapter starts with the results for H1, then H2, and finally H3. The types of analyses that were conducted are as follows: multiple regression analyses, one-way ANOVAs, and t-tests.  		In the two tables below, an overview is given on the numbers of interaction on items of the two models' profiles of the online field experiment. Table 4 shows the numbers of the black model's profile and table 5 shows the numbers for the white model's profile.  
Table 4: Number of interactions black model
ViewsFavouritesPrice bidsDays until soldStieglitz trench coat29630511Yellow Nike shirt7673Not soldWhite Nike shirt 142168 Not soldOrange Stieglitz shirt29013321Stieglitz multicolour turtleneck2291882
Table 5: Number of interactions white model
ViewsFavouritesPrice bidsDays until soldStieglitz trench coat457224Not soldYellow Nike shirt124132Not soldWhite Nike shirt 226188 Not soldOrange Stieglitz shirt245857Stieglitz multicolour turtleneck440385Not sold
	Before discussing the results, it needs to be mentioned that multicollinearity was found for two IVs of the data from the online experimental survey: colour-blindness and interaction variable. However, it was found that this multicollinearity did not have an impact on the significance of the results. Furthermore, in the data set of the experimental online survey, two of the DVs - prices offered for the Calvin Klein dress and Nike shirt - were not normally distributed and they were high in kurtosis. Therefore, it was tested whether this affected the significance of the results. Fortunately, by computing new variables with a log transformation for these two DVs, it was found that the high kurtosis did not impact the significance of the results. Lastly, the other DVs - prices offered for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt (online experimental survey), Stieglitz trench coat (online field experiment), orange Stieglitz shirt (online field experiment), white Nike shirt (online field experiment), yellow Nike shirt (online field experiment), multicolour Stieglitz turtleneck (online field experiment) - were all normally distributed. 
70.1 4.1. The interaction effect of colour-blind racism on price offers
      In this section, the results of H1 using the data collected from the online experimental survey are given. The hypothesis that is focused on is as follows:
      H1: Those who believe that racism is not a problem anymore will bid less money for clothes worn by a black model compared to other conditions
      For H1, three multiple linear regression analyses were conducted, one for every dependent variable: the prices offered for the Calvin Klein dress, the prices offered for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt, and the prices offered for the Nike shirt. As stated earlier, it was found that there exists multicollinearity between the colour-blindness variable and the interaction variable. Therefore, a new interaction variable based on log transformations was created to test whether this multicollinearity influenced the significance of the results. This test showed that the multicollinearity did not influence any significance of the results. Adding to that, the results stayed the same when creating a transformed interaction variable. Additionally, before discussing the results, the values of the dummy variable should be explained. Value 1 refers to the black model and the values that fall under 0 refer to either the white model or no model.	First of all, a multiple linear regression analysis with the prices offered for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt as criterion was conducted. The predictors were the dummy variable, colour-blindness variable, and the interaction variable. The model explains 5.0% of the variance. The model was found to be significant, F(2, 283) = 4.97, p = .002, R2  = .05. The level of colour-blind racism was a significant positive indicator for the prices offered for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt, (β = .16, p = .027). The interaction variable was not significant in predicting the prices offered for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt, (β = -.08, p = .777). The dummy variable was also an insignificant indicator, (β = -.09, p = .749). This result shows that colour-blind racism has a significant effect on the price that respondents would offer for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt. This result means that those who believe that racism is not a problem anymore, and who score low on the colour-blind racism variable, will bid less money for the clothes regardless of the model's skin colour. Those who believe racism is still a problem, and who score higher on the colour-blind racism variable, offer higher prices for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt. Considering this, the result is partially in line with H1, however the skin colour of the model is not a significant indicator for this relation and the hypothesis is therefore rejected.			Secondly, a multiple linear regression analysis with the prices offered for the Calvin Klein dress as criterion was conducted. The predictors were the dummy variable, the colour-blindness variable, and the interaction variable. The model explains 1.8% of the variance. The model was found to be insignificant, F(3, 283) = 1.76, p = .155, R2  = .02. The colour-blindness variable was not a significant predictor for the prices offered for the Calvin Klein dress, (β = .06, p = .389). The interaction variable was also not significant in predicting the prices offered for the Calvin Klein dress, (β = .32, p = .244). The dummy variable was not significant either in predicting the prices offered for the Calvin Klein dress, (β = -.33, p = .228). This result means that the skin colour of the model who wore the Calvin Klein dress and one's level of colour-blind racism do not have a significant effect on the price that respondents would offer for the Calvin Klein dress. In light of H1, this means that those who believe that racism is not a problem anymore won't necessarily bid less money for the Calvin Klein dress worn by a black model than the Calvin Klein dress worn by a white model. Therefore, this result is not in line with H1.								Thirdly, a multiple linear regression analysis with the prices offered for the Nike shirt as criterion was conducted. The predictors were the dummy variable, colour-blindness variable, and the interaction variable. The model explains 2.2% of the variance. The model was found to be insignificant, F(3, 283) = 2.07, p = .104, R2  = .02. The colour-blindness variable was a significant positive indicator for the prices offered for the Nike shirt, (β = .16, p = .031). The interaction variable was not significant in predicting the prices offered for the Nike shirt, (β = -.10, p = .712). The dummy variable was not significant either, (β = .13, p = .624). This result shows that the model is insignificant, even though one of the predictors - colour-blindness variable - had a significant effect. The result shows that people who score high on the colour-blind racism variable, meaning people who are likely to hold less colour-blind racist beliefs, would pay a higher price for the Nike shirt regardless of the skin colour of the model. Considering this, H1 can be rejected. 
70.2 4.2. The effect of a model's skin colour on consumer interaction on Vinted 
	In this section, the results for H2 are given using the data of the online field experiment collected on Vinted. The hypothesis is as follows:
H2: Clothes sold on Vinted by a black model will receive less interaction from Vinted users than when sold by a white model
      A t-test showed that the black model insignificantly received less views on clothes sold on Vinted (M = 206.60, SD = 95.76) than the white model (M = 298.40, SD = 144.67), t(8) = -1.18, p = .271. Considering the result of this t-test, H2 can be rejected. This means that there is no significant relation between the skin colour of a model and the amount of views, and thus interaction of Vinted users, a black or white model gets on an item sold on Vinted. Therefore, a black model will not significantly receive less views or less interaction on or with her items sold on Vinted than a white model based on her skin colour. However, it needs to be noted that the mean differences are in line with the hypothesis. The mean difference shows that the black model received less views on the items sold on Vinted than the white model.													A t-test showed that the black model insignificantly received less likes on clothes sold on Vinted (M = 16.80, SD = 8.47) than the white model (M = 19.80, SD = 11.45), t(8) = -.47, p = .650. This t-test rejects H2, meaning that there is no significant relation between the skin colour of a model and the amount of favourites - part of consumer interaction - a black or white model receives on an item sold on Vinted. Therefore, a black model will not receive less likes on her items sold on Vinted than a white model based on the colour of her skin. However, when only looking at the differences in means, it shows that the black model received less likes on clothes sold on Vinted than the white model, the mean differences thus support H2.												A t-test showed that the black model insignificantly received more price bids on clothes sold on Vinted (M = 5.40, SD = 2.51) than the white model (M = 4.80, SD = 2.17), t(8) = .41, p = .696. According to this result, H2 can be rejected. This means that there is no significant relation between the skin colour of a model and the amount of price bids, and thus interaction, a black or white model gets on an item sold on Vinted. In this case, a black model will not receive less price bids on her items sold on Vinted than a white model based on skin colour. When comparing the means and focusing on the mean differences, the black model actually received more price bids than the white model on Vinted. This is not in line with H2.	A t-test showed that the black model insignificantly sold clothes on Vinted in less days (M = 15.20, SD = 8.56) than the white model (M = 18.20, SD = 6.26), t(8) = -.63, p = .545. Considering this result, H2 can be rejected. This means that there is no significant relation between the skin colour of a model and the days until an item was sold on Vinted. It further shows that a black model will not take longer in selling clothes or receive less interaction on Vinted than a white model based on the colour of her skin. In addition, when considering the mean differences, the black model sold clothes on Vinted faster than the white model. This is not in line with H2. 								Finally, the data shows that the black model received a higher average amount of money for the clothes sold on Vinted (M = 50.00, SD = 26.45) than the white model (M = 35.00). This is not in line with H2, and the hypothesis can be rejected. 
70.3 4.3. The effect of a model's skin colour on price offers on clothes 
	This section is divided into two subsections as the results are given for both the experimental online survey and the online field experiment. The first sub-section focuses on the results of the online experimental survey and the second sub-section focuses on the outcomes of the online field experiment. Below is the hypothesis that will be of focus: 
H3: A black model will receive lower price bids on clothes compared to a white model
70.3.1 4.3.1. Experimental online survey
      To test whether the black model receives lower price bids on the items she could put on sale compared to the white model or no model, a one-way ANOVA was conducted. This analysis was conducted for all three items shown to the respondents in the online experimental survey: the Tommy Hilfiger shirt, the Calvin Klein dress, and the Nike shirt. 	To test whether the differences in price respondents offered for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt is dependent on the model's skin colour, a one-way ANOVA was conducted. The ANOVA revealed a significant main effect for a model's skin colour on the price that respondents would offer for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt, F = (2, 284) = 6.02, p = .003, partial η2 = .04. The Tukey post-hoc comparison revealed that the respondents who were assigned to the black model offered a lower price for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt (M = 12.27 , SD = 7.64 ) than respondents who were assigned to the images of the white model (M = 16.76, SD = 9.59), p = 002. Considering this result, H3 will be accepted, meaning that the skin colour of a model does have an influence on the price someone would offer for an item. In this case, respondents offered a lower price for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt worn by the black model than when worn by the white model.											To test for differences in the price respondents offered for the Calvin Klein dress depending on the model's skin colour, a one-way ANOVA was conducted. The ANOVA revealed an insignificant main effect for a model's skin colour on the price that respondents would offer for the Calvin Klein dress, F = (2, 284) = 0.29, p = .752, partial η2 = .00. Therefore, H3 will be rejected. This means that the skin colour of a model does not have an influence on the price that someone would pay for the Calvin Klein dress and thus indicates that skin colour does not have an effect on how much money a person would offer for a clothing item. Therefore, a black model does not significantly receive lower price bids than a white model based on the colour of her skin.							To test whether the differences in price respondents offered for the Nike shirt is dependent on the model's skin colour, a one-way ANOVA was conducted. The ANOVA revealed an insignificant main effect for a model's skin colour on the price that respondents would offer for the Nike shirt, F = (2, 284) = 0.26, p = .769, partial η2 = .00. Therefore, when focusing on the Nike shirt, H3 will be rejected, meaning that skin colour does not have an influence on the price that people would pay for this particular clothing item. 			Finally, although not related to H3, a t-test was conducted and indicated that the black model was significantly perceived by the sample as more attractive (M = 3.75, SD = 0.51) than the white model (M = 3.35, SD = 0.61), t(200) = 5.00, p < .001. This indicates that the colour of the model's skin has a significant effect on how attractive the respondents perceived the models.
70.3.2 4.3.2. Online field experiment
      To test for differences in the prices Vinted users would offer for the clothes sold by either the black or white model, a t-test was conducted. The t-test showed that the black model insignificantly received higher price bids for clothes sold on Vinted (M = 30.43 , SD = 22.80) than the white model (M = 26.06 , SD = 17.61), t(49) = 0.758, p = .452. This result rejects H3, meaning that skin colour does not have a significant effect on what Vinted users would offer for an item sold on the platform. When considering the mean differences, it actually shows that the black model received higher price bids than the white model, which is not in line with H3. 											A t-test showed that the black model insignificantly received higher price bids for the Stieglitz coat sold on Vinted (M = 71.00, SD = 7.42) than the white model (M = 57.75, SD = 11.70), t(7) = 2.08, p = .076. This results indicates that H3 can be rejected, there is no significant relation between the skin colour of the model and the amount of money in euros Vinted users would offer for the Stieglitz coat. Furthermore, the mean differences indicate that the black model received higher price bids than the white model, which is not in line  with H3.												A t-test showed that the black model insignificantly received lower price bids for the orange Stieglitz shirt sold on Vinted (M = 24.33, SD = 4.93) than the white model (M = 30.40, SD = 3.65), t(6) = - 2.016, p = .090. This result shows that H3 can be rejected, the skin colour of the model does not have a significant effect on how much money Vinted users would offer for the orange Stieglitz shirt.	When comparing the mean difference, this result does indicate that the black model received lower price bids for the item than the white model, which is actually in line with H3.										A final t-test showed that the black model significantly received higher price bids for the Stieglitz multicolour turtleneck sold on Vinted (M = 35.13, SD = 5.77) than the white model (M = 28.00, SD = 2.83), t(11) = 2.547, p = .027. This result indicates that the model's skin colour does have a significant influence on the prices offered for the Stieglitz multicolour turtleneck. However, when considering the mean differences, this result shows that the black model received higher price bids than the white model, this is not in line with H3 and the hypothesis will therefore be rejected. 								When comparing the price bids of the yellow Nike shirt for both the models, it was found that the black model (M = 10.00, SD = 1.00) received the same average in price bids as the white model (M = 10.00, SD = .00). There is thus no difference and H3 can in this case be rejected. This means that the black model did not receive lower price bids than the white model for the yellow Nike shirt. 								Additionally, when comparing the price bids of the white Nike shirt for both models, it was found that the black model (M = 10.31, SD = .96) received the same average in price bids as the white model (M = 10.31, SD = .80). Considering this, there are no mean differences, so in this case H3 can be rejected. This means that the black model did not receive lower price offers for the white Nike shirt than the white model.
  







71 5. Discussion
      In this final chapter there is a discussion section that interprets the main findings of both experiments. After this, in the conclusion section, an answer to the research question of this particular study is given. Finally, the limitations and strengths of this study are discussed and recommendations for future research are considered. 
71.1 5.1. Discussion
	To begin with, some interesting results related to H1 will be discussed. The results of the Tommy Hilfiger shirt suggest that people who scored high on the colour-blind racism variable, which actually means that a person is less likely to hold colour-blind racist beliefs (see measure colour-blind racism on page 33), would offer a higher price for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt regardless of the model's skin colour. In addition, the data of the Nike shirt also suggests that those who score high on the colour-blind racism variable offered a higher price for the Nike shirt regardless of the model's skin colour. However, the results of the Calvin Klein dress show differently and indicate that skin colour nor the level of colour-blind racism have a significant effect on the prices respondents would offer for the Calvin Klein dress. So, why do the results of the Tommy Hilfiger shirt and Nike shirt specify that individuals who are less likely to hold colour-blind racist beliefs would offer a higher amount of money for the clothing items regardless of the model's skin colour? It could be argued that people who are less likely to hold colour-blind racist beliefs are better or higher educated than individuals who are more likely to hold colour-blind racist beliefs. A better education could be a result of living in a wealthy environment which could lead to having more income available to spend on clothes. Thus, wealth and income can be confounding variables. Arguing from this point of view, it can be predicted that people who do not hold colour-blind racist ideologies are wealthier, have more income, and can thus bid higher prices for the clothes sold on Vinted. What is further interesting to note, is that overall the respondents of the survey scored quite high on the colour-blind racism variable in this study (N = 303, M = 3.79). This means that on average the respondents do not immensely hold colour-blind racist beliefs. This finding does not fully support the existent literature on colour-blind racism in Europe that suggests that people from European countries hold colour-blind racist beliefs. Multiple studies (Beaman & Petts, 2020; Moffit et al., 2018; Naidoo, 2019; Ware, 2014; Weiner, 2014) indicate that colour-blind racism is very prevalent in European countries in contemporary society. However the findings of this study show a slightly different situation. This outcome is important as it contradicts with the existing literature. 						Moving on, the second hypothesis revealed some more valuable results. When only comparing the means when focusing on the interaction that both models received on their Vinted profiles, it can be concluded that the black model clearly received less consumer interaction than the white model. However, most of these results are statistically insignificant, so the colour of a model's skin does not necessarily impact the consumer interaction on items sold on Vinted. One of the reasons that the white model might have received more interaction on the uploaded items, as can be seen from the results, is because the black model actually sold (see tables 4 and 5 on page 37) the Stieglitz multicolour turtleneck in two days, the Stieglitz trench coat in 11 days, and the orange Stieglitz shirt in 21 days. The white model only sold the orange Stieglitz shirt in seven days. Because the other items were not sold on the white model's profile, the items were longer available to Vinted users. This allowed for more interaction with the clothing items. Additionally, this could explain why, for instance, the Stieglitz multicolour turtleneck received more views and favourites on the white model's profile than on the black model's profile. Moreover, a compelling result from the online field experiment is that the black model actually sold more clothes on Vinted and received more price bids on clothes than the white model. The results indicate that there is no significant effect of skin colour on these occurrences, but it is worth to mention. A factor that influenced the larger amount of price bids and faster selling of the items could be the time period wherein the items were uploaded. As stated in the methods chapter, the items of the black model were uploaded in a different period of time than those of the white model. For example, it could have happened that in the specific time period when the data was tracked for the black model more people were searching for a trench coat (as it was more in the beginning of Spring) than in the time period that the white model uploaded the trench coat (later in Spring). Skin colour is thus not a significant or proper factor in explaining the consumer interaction of both the profiles in this case. Other factors might be stronger in explaining these results. For instance, in the online experimental survey it was found that respondents significantly perceived the black model as more attractive than the white model. This finding could also have had an effect on Vinted users in the online field experiment. It might have happened that if the black model was perceived as more attractive this could have impacted the amount of time until an item was sold and the amount of price bids received. Moreover, as stated earlier, there were no significant relations found between skin colour and consumer interaction, so it can be stated that a model's skin colour was not a determining factor in the level of interaction the profiles received on Vinted. This finding is not in line with what Levy & Barocas (2017) suggest regarding different treatment based on one's profile characteristics on online marketplaces. Their study argues that personal information available on one's online profile (e.g. name, profile picture, and race) impacts how online buyers interact with someone's profile. Considering the theories of systemic racism and unconscious bias they would argue that race is a determining factor in the interaction with items sold on an online platform, but the results of this particular study reject this.							Lastly, we take a look at the findings for H3. First of all, the results of the ANOVAs executed for H1 regarding colour-blind racism indicate that skin colour is not a significant factor in determining the prices respondents would offer for the different clothing items. Therefore, H3 and the theories of cyber racism and discrimination on online marketplaces is not supported by these results. As stated before, these theories argue that racism is more overt online and in turn would lead to the skin colour of the model - or race - being an indicator for the differences in prices offered for an item (Brock, 2005; Hargittai, 2010; Levy & Barocas, 2017). The fact that skin colour does not have a significant effect on the price someone would offer for a clothing item is a valuable finding. 						However, when focusing on the specific analyses executed for H3 in the results chapter, a thought-provoking discovery was found in the data of the online experimental survey. The Tommy Hilfiger shirt showed a significant effect of a model's skin colour on the amount of money respondents would offer for the item. The result is therefore in line with H3, meaning that the black model significantly received lower price bids for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt based on the colour of her skin. However, the other two items - the Calvin Klein dress and the Nike shirt - showed an insignificant result, arguing that skin colour does not have an effect on the prices offered for the items. A considerable reason why there was significance for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt is that this item was first shown to all respondents during the online experimental survey. What could have happened is that for this image respondents were actually more aware of the skin colour of the model as it was the first picture shown to them. While for the following two items respondents could have been more focused on the items itself rather than on the skin colour of the model. Their unconscious bias might have come into play for the first image shown to them: it was their first impression of the model. This point of view suggests that one's race matters during first impressions and actually supports the theory of unconscious bias which argues that people unconsciously have prejudices ready and in this way perpetuate unintentional racism (Equality Challenge Unit, 2013; Moule, 2009). This argument can be supported by the Accessibility-Diagnosticity Framework. Taking this framework into consideration it can be assumed that for the first image and item - the Tommy Hilfiger shirt - the skin colour of the model could have been used as a diagnostic source of information for the respondent, assessing the price offer based on existing prejudices regarding one's skin colour. However, when seeing the following images with the same model but different clothing items, respondents had to rely on their own memories (accessibility) when assessing the value of the product (Menon et al., 1995). For the other images they needed to be more focused on the different items and thinking of what price offers would fit those items instead of focusing on the skin colour of the model. To sum up, this finding is in line with the theory of unconscious bias (Moule, 2009) and the different treatment of people of colour on online marketplaces (Levy & Barocas, 2017).			Finally, when considering the results of the online field experiment and only comparing the means, it indicates that the black model actually received higher price bids for the clothes sold on Vinted compared to the white model. However, the results are insignificant and a claim that the skin colour has an actual influence on the price bids cannot be made. As mentioned earlier, in the online experimental survey, the black model was perceived as more attractive. The attractiveness of the model could for the online field experiment also be an indicator of why the black model received higher price bids. Having said that, another result that is valuable to discuss is that of the Stieglitz multicolour turtleneck. This result is significant and showed that the black model received higher price bids than the white model based on skin colour. A reason for this could be because of the time period in which the item was uploaded. The item was uploaded in March, so the weather in Europe could have been colder and Vinted users were more likely to search for warmer clothes (it is a full length sleeve turtleneck) than Vinted users would search for in May (a period closer to warmer weather). To further elaborate, this particular finding is inconsistent with what studies related to racial discrimination on platforms such a Airbnb, Uber, TaskRabbit, and Fiverr have found (Edelman & Luca, 2014; Hannák et al., 2017; McLaughin, 2018). These studies actually found that the influence of skin colour leads to disadvantages for people of colour. A reason why the findings of this study differs is because of the platform looked into. Airbnb, Uber, TaskRabbit, and Fiverr are service-oriented platforms. Therefore, the personal characteristics of an Airbnb host or Uber driver might matter more to people than on an online second-hand fashion platform. In addition, the iPod experiment of Doleac and Stein (2010) also indicated that sellers of colour receive lower price bids for the iPods than white sellers. A reason for this might be because of the value of the product sold. Luxury tech products are more expensive. Thus, when arguing from the unconscious bias and systemic racism point of view, some individuals might trust sellers of colour less (due to racial prejudices) than white sellers with such expensive products. As the clothes used for this study are not as high in value as an iPod, people who hold unconscious biases might not be impacted as much by a Vinted seller's skin colour than when in the process of buying more expensive products. 
71.2 5.2. Conclusion 
      In this section an answer is given to the research question: "To what extent does a model's race have an influence on consumer interaction with clothes on sale on online second-hand shopping platforms?" It can be concluded, based on the findings of this particular study, that overall a model's skin colour does not have a statistically significant influence on the consumer interaction with clothes sold on online second-hand shopping platforms. Other factors can be more relevant for the differences in interaction, such as the time period that items were uploaded or how attractive the model is perceived. Nonetheless, even though most results indicate that skin colour is not a determining factor, one result actually suggests that there is an existence of unconscious bias and shows how skin colour does have a significant influence on price offers. The Tommy Hilfiger shirt - an image first shown to respondents in the online experimental survey - showed that the black model received significantly lower price bids. As it was the first image shown and thus the first impression of the model for the respondents, the skin colour therefore could have had an impact on the price they would offer. This suggests that unconscious biases might exist on online second-hand fashion platforms.								To conclude, even though most results offer positive and interesting indications, the finding that unconscious biases might be prevalent on online second-hand shopping platforms is important information. It shows that racism does not overtly occur on these platforms, but still exists in some sense in the form of unconscious biases and is therefore more covert. In sum, even though this study might point into the direction of a less racist or biased Europe, we are definitely not there yet. What is important to mention is that many of the studies cited in this particular study were published before the BLM protests of last year. Taking this into consideration, the effect of the protests could be a possible explanation for differences between this study and previous research. To finalise, this research study aimed to create more awareness regarding unconscious biases and systemic racism. When creating awareness regarding such a large problem, as a society we can think of solutions to stop this problem and create a fair and safe environment for everyone, no matter one's race.
71.3 5.3. Limitations
      To better understand this study, it is of value to reflect on its limitations. First of all, an important limitation of this study to discuss is the influence that the algorithms of Vinted had on the execution of the online field experiment. A result of the algorithms, as discussed in the methods chapter, was that the first profile of the white model was blocked by Vinted. Because of this, the data could not be gathered at the exact same time as the data of the black model's profile. This resulted in another factor that needed to be taken into account, namely that the time period in which the items were uploaded on Vinted could have had an impact on the results. For example, Vinted promotions such as discounts on shipping costs were different during the two time periods in which the data was collected. When there is a large discount on the shipping methods available on Vinted, users might be more likely to buy a specific item as the shipping method has become cheaper. The final data gathering of the white model's profile on Vinted took place, for one day, on an important day in the Netherlands: King's day. This day is known for its tradition of selling your old belongings, such as clothes, to others. Vinted used this day as a promotional day as well and this could have influenced the data as more users might have been active on Vinted this particular day. Furthermore, the different time periods could impact the results as Vinted users might have different needs during these months. As explained earlier, in the beginning of March users could still be looking for warmer clothes compared to April.									Another limitation of the online field experiment is the time frame of three weeks in which the data was gathered. On Vinted it can sometimes take longer than three weeks for an item to be sold or to actually receive different price bids. If the data tracking time would have been longer, there might be a possibility that items used for the experiment would receive more price bids which would create more data to compare. In this study, eventually, only the five items discussed got the most price bids, while the other identical items did not get any price bids in the time frame of three weeks. However, a strength of this study lies in the fact that two types of experiments were used. To make up for the less price bids on Vinted, the online experimental survey added extra data regarding price offers of respondents. This way, the analyses could still be executed properly with the data of the online experimental survey.	Finally, a limitation of the online experimental survey was the missing demographical question related to the respondents' educational level. Respondents were not asked about their highest achieved educational level. This is unfortunate as the statement made about individuals holding less colour-blind racist thoughts are likely to be higher educated cannot be statistically supported in this study. A factor that made up for this limitation is that the random assignment of respondents in the online experimental survey created a balanced distribution of educational levels among the respondents even if their level of education was not specifically measured. Nevertheless, if this study would be replicated at some point it time, it is recommended to ask respondents about their educational level. 				Lastly, the online experimental survey used - to measure colour-blind racism - only three items of the CoBRAS. Therefore, arguments regarding colour-blind racism might be slightly weak in this study. Thus, a recommendation for future research would be to use more items of the scale to strengthen arguments. 
71.4 5.4. Future research
      Based on the limitations discussed above, a recommendation for future research is to make sure that the online field experiment is not intervened with by algorithms on Vinted that could lead to blocking one or more profiles under study. This, to reduce extra factors (e.g. the time periods in which items are uploaded) that could intervene with the data gathering and the results. For a future study, an alternative for Vinted whereon an online field experiment can be conducted is Depop. Nonetheless, Depop also has community guidelines and algorithms which should be considered carefully before executing an experiment on there. Moreover, when conducting an online field experiment like the one from this study, it is recommended to extend the data gathering period to more weeks. This eventually collects more data which could be helpful for the research in comparing the data. 						In addition, as there is still a lack of scientific studies on the effects that a model's skin colour could have on the interaction with fashion items on the consumer side, it could be interesting to execute some more experiments on different platforms. For example, social media platforms such as Instagram or Facebook. To illustrate, an experiment in collaboration with fashion brands could be done to test if photos posted on Instagram of clothes worn by a black model receives less likes or less interaction than photos of clothes posted worn by a white model. Adding to that, content analyses can be conducted on Instagram to compare the interaction with photos including a black model and the interaction with photos including a white model. Do photos with black models get less interaction than photos with white models, the other way around, or do they receive similar interaction? 					Another recommendation for future research is to focus on a more qualitative approach regarding the topic of this study. A future study could look into the experiences, perceptions, and opinions of black as well as white users of online second-hand fashion platforms to see whether there is a difference in their experiences for selling their second-hand clothes online. Do black users experience more difficulties in selling clothes compared to white users? Such research could complement and enrich the existing quantitative studies.	Lastly, when considering that there were higher price bids for the Tommy Hilfiger shirt, for future research, studies could look into the differences between clothing brands. Do people bid higher prices for Tommy Hilfiger shirts than for Nike shirts? Are some clothing brands associated to a particular ethnic group and does this influence the amount of money individuals would offer for a clothing item from that brand?					There is still much to learn and research on the existence of (un)conscious biases in every day life's activities and people their actions and thoughts. This study is a starting point in experimental research regarding the effects of a model's skin colour on consumer interaction with products, in this case clothes, on online second-hand fashion platforms. 
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
      
72 7. Bibliography
Asare, J. G. (2020, March 18). How H&M has completely revamped their diversity and inclusion training. Forbes. Retrieved from https://www.forbes.com/sites/janicegassam/2020/03/18/how-hm-has-completely-revamped-their-diversity-and-inclusion-training/?sh=3b301d0c5df0
Babbie, E. (2014). The basics of social research. Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.
Baker, C. N. (2005). Images of women's sexuality in advertisements: A content analysis of black- and white-oriented women's and men's magazines. Sex Roles, 52(1-2), 13-27. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-005-1190-y
Beaman, J., & Petts, A. (2020b). Towards a global theory of colorblindness: Comparing 	colorblind racial ideology in France and the United States. Sociology Compass, 14(4), 	1-11. https://doi.org/10.1111/soc4.12774
Blanton, H., & Jaccard, J. (2008). Unconscious racism: A concept in pursuit of a measure. Annual Review of Sociology, 34(1), 277-297. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.33.040406.131632
Bliuc, A.-M., Faulkner, N., Jakubowicz, A., & McGarty, C. (2018). Online networks of racial hate: A systematic review of 10 years of research on cyber-racism. Computers in Human Behavior, 87, 75-86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.05.026
Blum, L. (2002). Racism: What is it and what it isn't. Studies in Philosophy and Education, 	21(3), 203-218. https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1015503031960
Bogel-Burroughs, N., Barry, E., & Wright, W. (2021, May 8). Ma'Khia Bryant's journey 	through foster care ended with an officer's bullet. The New York Times.			https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/08/us/columbus-makhia-bryant-foster-care.html
Bonilla-Silva, E. (2015). The structure of racism in color-blind, "post-racial" America. 	American Behavioral Scientist, 59(11), 1358-1376. 	https://doi.org/10.1177/0002764215586826
Bonilla-Silva, E. (2017). Racism Without Racists : Color-blind racism and the persistence of 	racial inequality in America: Vol. Fifth edition. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
Bonilla-Silva, E. (2020). Color-blind racism in pandemic times. Sociology of Race and Ethnicity, 1(1), 1-12. https://doi.org/10.1177/2332649220941024
Bonilla-Silva, E., & Ashe, A. (2014). The end of racism?: Colorblind racism and popular 	media. In Nilsen S. & Turner S. (Eds.), The Colorblind Screen: Television in Post-	Racial America (pp. 57-80). NYU Press. Retrieved February 23, 2021, from 	http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt9qg55f.6
Bowser, B. P. (2017). Racism: origin and theory. Journal of Black Studies, 48(6), 572-590. 	https://doi.org/10.1177/0021934717702135
Brock, A. (2005). "A belief in humanity is a belief in colored men:" Using culture to span the digital divide. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 11(1), 357-374. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-6101.2006.tb00317.x
Bryant, S. L. (2019). The beauty ideal: The effects of european standards of beauty on black 	women. Columbia Social Work Review, 11(1), 80-91.				https://doi.org/10.7916/cswr.v11i1.1933
Burke, M. A. (2017). Colorblind racism: Identities, ideologies, and shifting subjectivities. Sociological Perspectives, 60(5), 857-865. https://doi.org/10.1177/0731121417723827
Byrd, D., Ceacal, Y., Felton, J., Nicholson, C., Rhaney, D., McCray, N., & Young, J. (2017). A modern doll study: Self concept. Race, Gender & Class, 24(1-2), 186-202. https://doi.org/10.2307/26529244
Davis, J. F. (2017). Selling whiteness? - A critical review of the literature on marketing and racism. Journal of Marketing Management, 34(1-2), 134-177. https://doi.org/10.1080/0267257x.2017.1395902
Depop. (2021). About. Depop. https://www.depop.com/about/
Dewan, S. (2021, April 20). What are the charges against Derek Chauvin? The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/20/us/derek-chauvin-charges.html
Doleac, J. L., & Stein, L. C. D. (2013). The visible hand: Race and online market 	outcomes. The Economic Journal, 123(572), F469-F492. 	https://doi.org/10.1111/ecoj.12082
Ducey, K., & Feagin, J. R. (2021). Revealing Britain's systemic racism: The case of Meghan 	Markle and the Royal Family (1st ed.). Routledge.
Edelman, B. G., & Luca, M. (2014). Digital discrimination: The case of Airbnb.com. SSRN Electronic Journal, 1(1), 1-21. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2377353
Edelman, B., Luca, M., & Svirsky, D. (2017). Racial discrimination in the sharing economy: 	Evidence from a field experiment. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 	9(2), 1-22. https://doi.org/10.1257/app.20160213
Equality Challenge Unit. (2013). Unconscious bias and higher education. http://www.ecu.ac.uk/publications/unconscious-bias-in-higher-education/
Feagin, J., & Elias, S. (2013). Rethinking racial formation theory: a systemic racism critique. 	Ethnic and Racial Studies, 36(6), 931-960. 	https://doi.org/10.1080/01419870.2012.669839
Fowler, J. G., & Carlson, L. (2015). The visual presentation of beauty in transnational fashion magazine advertisements. Journal of Current Issues & Research in Advertising, 36(2), 136-156. https://doi.org/10.1080/10641734.2015.1023872
Gay, T., Hammer, S., & Ruel, E. (2020). Examining the relationship between institutionalized 	racism and COVID-19. City & Community, 19(3), 523-530. 	https://doi.org/10.1111/cico.12520
Ge, Y., Knittel, C. R., MacKenzie, D., & Zoepf, S. (2020). Racial discrimination in 	transportation network companies. Journal of Public Economics, 190, 104205. 	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2020.104205
Grosfoguel, R. (2016). What is racism? Journal of World-Systems Research, 22(1), 9-15. 	https://doi.org/10.5195/jwsr.2016.609
Hannák, A., Wagner, C., Garcia, D., Mislove, A., Strohmaier, M., & Wilson, C. (2017). Bias in online freelance marketplaces. Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing, 1914-1933. https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998327
Hargittai, E. (2010). Digital na(t)ives? Variation in internet skills and uses among members of the "Net Generation." Sociological Inquiry, 80(1), 92-113. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-682x.2009.00317.x
Haskell, R. E. (2009). Unconscious linguistic referents to race: analysis and methodological 	frameworks. Discourse & Society, 20(1), 59-84. 	https://doi.org/10.1177/0957926508097095
Hayes, R., Joosen, K. J., & Smiley, C. (2018). Black petes & black crooks? Racial 	stereotyping and offending in the Netherlands. Contemporary Justice Review, 21(1), 	16-32. https://doi.org/10.1080/10282580.2018.1415049
Hylton, K., & Lawrence, S. (2014). Reading Ronaldo: contingent whiteness in the football media. Soccer & Society, 16(5-6), 765-782. https://doi.org/10.1080/14660970.2014.963310
Jung, J., & Lee, Y.-J. (2009). Cross-cultural examination of women's fashion and beauty magazine advertisements in the United States and South Korea. Clothing and Textiles Research Journal, 27(4), 274-286. https://doi.org/10.1177/0887302x08327087
Kettrey, H. H., & Laster, W. N. (2014). Staking territory in the "World White Web." Social Currents, 1(3), 257-274. https://doi.org/10.1177/2329496514540134
Koettl, C., & Kim, C. (2021, May 24). Andrew Brown Jr. shooting videos cast doubt on police use of force. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/05/22/us/andrew-brown-jr-shooting-body-cam-video.html
Levy, K., & Barocas, S. (2017). Designing against discrimination in online markets. Berkeley 	Technology Law Journal, 32(3), 1183-1238. https://doi.org/10.15779/Z38BV79V7K
Lévy, P. (2001). Cyberculture. Amsterdam University Press.
Luca, M., & Svirsky, D. (2020). Detecting and mitigating discrimination in online 	platforms: Lessons from Airbnb, Uber, and others. NIM Marketing Intelligence 	Review, 12(2), 28-33. https://doi.org/10.2478/nimmir-2020-0014
Macionis, J. J., & Plummer, K. (2012). Sociology: A Global Introduction (5th ed.).		Prentice Hall.
Malanda, A. B. (2021). "I had a dark skin color, that was a problem": Race and racism in the 	child welfare system in postwar west Germany. Zeitgeschichte, 48(1), 73-90. 	https://doi.org/10.14220/zsch.2021.48.1.73
McLaughlin, B. R. (2018). #Airbnbwhileblack: Repealing the fair housing act's Mrs. Murphy 	exemption to combat racism on Airbnb. Wisconsin Law Review, 2018(1), 149-186.
Menon, G., Raghubir, P., & Schwarz, N. (1995). Behavioral frequency judgments: An 	accessibility-diagnosticity framework. Journal of Consumer Research, 22(2), 212. 	https://doi.org/10.1086/209446
Millard, J. E., & Grant, P. R. (2006). The stereotypes of black and white women in fashion magazine photographs: The pose of the model and the impression she creates. Sex Roles, 54(9-10), 659-673. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-006-9032-0
Moffitt, U., Juang, L. P., & Syed, M. (2018). "We don't do that in Germany!" A critical race 	theory examination of Turkish heritage young adults' school experiences. Ethnicities, 	19(5), 830-857. https://doi.org/10.1177/1468796818788596
Moule, J. (2009). Understanding unconscious bias and unintentional racism. Phi Delta		 Kappan, 90(5), 320-326. https://doi.org/10.1177/003172170909000504
Naidoo, K. (2019). Race, ethnicity, discrimination and violence in "colour-blind" France. 	Fundamina, 25(2), 68-93. https://doi.org/10.17159/2411-7870/2019/v25n2a4
Neuman, W.L. (2014). Experimental research. In: Neuman, W.L., Social Research Methods:	 Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches (7th Ed.), p. 281-313. Essex: Pearson.
Neville, H. A., Lilly, R. L., Duran, G., Lee, R. M., & Browne, L. (2000). Construction and initial validation of the color-blind racial attitudes scale (CoBRAS). Journal of Counseling Psychology, 47(1), 59-70. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0167.47.1.59
Newman, S.L. (2017).  Black models matter: Challenging the racism of aesthetics and the facade of inclusion in the fashion industry. CUNY Academic Works.
https://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc_etds/2143
Nilsen, S., & Turner, S. (2014). Introduction. In Nilsen S. & Turner S. (Eds.), The Colorblind 	Screen: Television in Post-Racial America (pp. 1-12). NYU Press. Retrieved February 23, 	2021, from http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt9qg55f.3 
Noon, M. (2017). Pointless diversity training: Unconscious bias, new racism and agency. Work, Employment and Society, 32(1), 198-209. https://doi.org/10.1177/0950017017719841
Nunley, J. M., Owens, M. F., & Howard, R. S. (2011). The effects of information and competition on racial discrimination: Evidence from a field experiment. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 80(3), 670-679. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2011.06.028
Ohanian, R. (1990). Construction and validation of a scale to measure celebrity endorsers' 	perceived expertise, trustworthiness, and attractiveness. Journal of Advertising, 19(3), 	39-52. 
Oriola, T. B., & Knight, W. A. (2020). COVID-19, George Floyd and human security. 	African Security, 13(2), 111-115. https://doi.org/10.1080/19392206.2020.1783760
Orsini, G., Smit, S., Farcy, J. B., & Merla, L. (2021). Institutional racism within the securitization of migration. The case of family reunification in Belgium. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 1-20. https://doi.org/10.1080/01419870.2021.1878249
Ortiz, S. M. (2020). Racists without racism? From colourblind to entitlement racism online. 	Ethnic and Racial Studies, 1-21. https://doi.org/10.1080/01419870.2020.1825758
Ostertag, S. F., & Armaline, W. T. (2011). Image isn't everything: Contemporary systemic 	racism and antiracism in the age of Obama. Humanity & Society, 35(3), 261-289.	 https://doi.org/10.1177/016059761103500304
Piracha, A., Sharples, R., Forrest, J., & Dunn, K. (2019). Racism in the sharing economy: 	Regulatory challenges in a neo-liberal cyber world. Geoforum, 98, 144-152. 	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2018.11.007
Polek, E., Wöhrle, J., & Pieter van Oudenhoven, J. (2009). The role of attachment styles, perceived discrimination, and cultural distance in adjustment of German and Eastern European immigrants in the Netherlands. Cross-Cultural Research, 44(1), 60-88. https://doi.org/10.1177/1069397109352779
Poster, M. (2001). What's the matter with the Internet? (First edition). Univ Of Minnesota 	Press.
Powell-Hopson, D., & Hopson, D. S. (1988). Implications of doll color preferences among black preschool children and white preschool children. Journal of Black Psychology, 14(2), 57-63. https://doi.org/10.1177/00957984880142004
Reddy-Best, K. L., Choi, E., & Park, H. (2018). Race, colorism, body size, body position, and sexiness. Clothing and Textiles Research Journal, 36(4), 281-295. https://doi.org/10.1177/0887302x18779140
Reddy-Best, K. L., Kane, L., Harmon, J., & Gagliardi, N. R. (2017). Critical perspectives on fashion textbooks: representations of race, gender, and body. International Journal of Fashion Design, Technology and Education, 11(1), 63-75. https://doi.org/10.1080/17543266.2017.1299226
Schimminger, M. C. (2020, September 24). Report: Racial and gender diversity increase, size and age inclusivity drop at New York Fashion Week Spring 2021. The Fashion Spot. Retrieved from https://www.thefashionspot.com/runway-news/858302-diversity-report-new-york-fashion-week-spring-2021/
Sturdivant, T. (2021, February 22). What I learned when I recreated the famous 'doll test' that looked at how Black kids see race. The Conversation. Retrieved from https://theconversation.com/what-i-learned-when-i-recreated-the-famous-doll-test-that-looked-at-how-black-kids-see-race-153780
Suler, J. (2004). The Online Disinhibition Effect. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 7(3), 		321-326. https://doi.org/10.1089/1094931041291295
Tate, S. A., & Page, D. (2018). Whiteliness and institutional racism: hiding behind 	(un)conscious bias. Ethics and Education, 13(1), 141-155. 	https://doi.org/10.1080/17449642.2018.1428718
The New York Times (2021, April 23). The death of Daunte Wright: What to know. The New 	York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/article/daunte-wright-death-minnesota.html
Turner, S. E., & Nilsen, S. (2014). The Colorblind Screen: Television in Post-Racial America. NYU Press.
Veerman, E. (2016, December 13). "Welke pop vind je lelijk?" VPRO. https://www.vpro.nl/lees/gids/2016/51/-Welke-pop-vind-je-lelijk--.html
Vinted. (2021). Don't wear it? Sell it! Vinted. Retrieved from https://www.vinted.com/about
Weiner, M. F. (2014). The ideologically colonized metropole: Dutch racism and racist 	denial. Sociology Compass, 8(6), 731-744. https://doi.org/10.1111/soc4.12163
Wissinger, E. (2012). Managing the semiotics of skin tone: Race and aesthetic labor in the fashion modeling industry. Economic and Industrial Democracy, 33(1), 125-143. https://doi.org/10.1177/0143831x11427591
Yan, Y., & Bissell, K. (2014). The globalization of beauty: How is ideal beauty influenced by globally published fashion and beauty magazines? Journal of Intercultural Communication Research, 43(3), 194-214. https://doi.org/10.1080/17475759.2014.917432



















73  8. Appendices
	On the following pages, the appendices are showcased: the images used for the online field experiment, the images used for the online experimental survey, and finally an overview of what the online experimental survey looked like. 
73.1 8.1. Appendix A: Images online field experiment

























73.2 8.2. Appendix B: Images online experimental survey


73.3 8.3. Appendix C: Online experimental survey 

















































































































     Weaponized Meta-Memetics
Measuring the Effectiveness of Internet Memes as Ideological Propaganda






Student Name:Nicolas KoutoniasStudent Number:430273Supervisor:Dr. João Fernando Ferreira Gonçalves
Master Media Studies - Media, Culture & Society
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication
Erasmus University Rotterdam

MA Thesis
September 25th, 2020
18 375 words


	ABSTRACT

Over time, internet memes have grown beyond the jokes and humorous cultural artefacts of once fringe online communities. Nowadays, they've become so widespread as to be a self-reinforcing genre of online communication, and they have therefore been the subject or increasing scrutiny and study, both in academia and in popular media sources. Although the process of how internet memes disseminate information can be applied to both positive and negative information, the efficiency through which they can spread information has made them the ideal vehicles for bad faith actors to use them to spread misinformation. Misinformation-carrying and offensive memes have, as well, contributed to the radicalization of people. Through informational overload inherent to Web 2.0, ideologically harmful internet memes may have also played a role in the normalization of extreme, previously fringe ideologies. There is a lack of quantitative experimental research into the extent to which harmful (racist, for example) internet memes can lead viewers to later consider that same harmful ideological position as more normal than if they hadn't been first exposed to it through memes. Overexposure to a harmful ideology through memes could be theorized to prime people into being more accepting of more extreme forms of prejudice later, although one's level of knowledge and literacy in 'internet meme language' could inoculate them against this negative effect. This study attempts to demonstrate this normalizing effect, but ultimately fails to do so, in part due to the relatively small sample being insufficient to achieve statistically significant results. Although this study's results lack significance, the theoretical background and how it motivates the study design could prove to have value, and would benefit from being replicated on a larger scale, with more respondents.

	KEYWORDS

Experiment - Propaganda -Racist - Meme - Acceptability


	TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION...................................................................................................................................1
	General Introduction...................................................................................................................1
	Relevance....................................................................................................................................3
	Structure......................................................................................................................................4
THEORY.................................................................................................................................................6
	Introduction.................................................................................................................................6
	Classical Memetics.....................................................................................................................6
	Meta-Memetics.........................................................................................................................13
	Memetic Communities, the Lulz, & Trolling...........................................................................19
	Misinformation.........................................................................................................................22
       Disinformation, Propaganda, & Radicalization........................................................................23
METHODS............................................................................................................................................28
	Introduction...............................................................................................................................28
	Sampling & Data.......................................................................................................................30
	Structure & Manipulation.........................................................................................................32
	Stimuli.......................................................................................................................................34
	Operationalization, Reliability, & Validity...............................................................................39
		Meta-Memetic Literacy...............................................................................................40
		Perceived Credibility & Harmfulness..........................................................................41
RESULTS..............................................................................................................................................43
	Tests, Results, & Statistical Significance.................................................................................43
	Discussion.................................................................................................................................46
CONCLUSION......................................................................................................................................48
	Implications for Theory............................................................................................................48
	Answering Research Questions................................................................................................48
	Limitations................................................................................................................................49
	Suggestions for Future Research..............................................................................................50
REFERENCES......................................................................................................................................52
APPENDIX A........................................................................................................................................56
1. INTRODUCTION

1.1 General Introduction
Although they have existed in one form or another since the early days of the internet, internet memes have gone through a process of mainstreaming since their proliferation was facilitated under Web 2.0's focus on online participation (Shifman, 2014, p. 18). These memes have grown from often humorous, always self-referential images spread through social networks to a significantly intricate genre of communication between participants of various online spaces (Wiggins & Bowers, 2015). 
	Much academic and non-academic research has been conducted into the creation, understanding, and use of internet memes, and even more into how culture and cultural artefacts spread; the field of memetics, from which online culture appropriated the name assigned to the unit of culture, the meme. As internet memes have developed, however, a growing focus in literature has been into the significant socio-political power they may hold (Bertazolli, 2019; Huntington, 2019; Moreno-Almeida, 2020), as a concise form of ideological communication.
	Internet memes, and their ease of dissemination, can have a positive impact on society by allowing information to spread, contributing for instance to the construction and reinforcement of collective identity of marginalized groups (Gal, Shifman & Kampf, 2016). They can also, however, have a negative impact, by allowing misinformation and disinformation to spread and catch on just as easily. The recent phenomenon of fake news, for instance, owes a lot of its intensity and consequences to the ease though which internet memes can disseminate false information (Smith, 2019). Similarly, internet memes can also spread harmful ideas, of a racist, sexist, of homophobic nature for instance, while maintaining a relaxed detachment towards the harmfulness of the carried information (Drakett, Rickett, Day & Milnes, 2018). A racist meme, for example, will have its offensiveness defended under the guise of it having been "only a joke" (Williams, Oliver, Aumer & Meyers, 2016, p. 425).
	In the following, I will argue that while certain offensive memes can indeed be perceived as simply jokes - in poor taste, hurtful, but jokes nonetheless - other offensive memes can have a more serious, more insidious negative effect on those who view them. Someone who does not hold racist beliefs will not necessarily have their minds changed from exposure to a racist meme, but the harmful information it carries may initiate a process of subconscious normalization in that person, and they may later encounter a more extreme form of racism, in a meme or a different format, and not perceive it to be as harmful as it actually is.
	Through experimental conditions in an online survey, I will expose consenting participants to different formats of offensive racist information, in a small sample of memes and a short paragraph of text. Different groups will be exposed to memes and text in different orders, to experimentally determine if exposure to a particular harmful idea in an internet meme first can influence later consideration of the same idea in a textual format, with respondents viewing it as more credible, less harmful, and therefore more 'normal'. My first research question, then, will be as follows:
To what extent does the exposure to a harmful idea through internet memes influence the later acceptance of that same idea as normal, in different formats?
	The online communities where internet memes generally proliferate, however, give involved members a certain level of comprehension exclusivity. Memes are, at their most fundamental level, inside jokes shared between friends. Even when these small groups have grown far beyond any reasonable scope of personal acquaintance they may have held in the internet's early days, the dynamic of memes being most understandable by those 'in the know' has remained. As such, I will conceptualize and attempt to measure such 'internet meme literacy' in my respondents prior to exposing them to the stimuli (in whichever order), to see if intimate knowledge of the 'language' of internet memes can somehow protect respondents from their negative ideological effect of normalization. The second research question, therefore, will be:
To what extent does high internet meme literacy protect viewers from accepting a harmful idea as normal, if initially exposed to it through internet memes?
	In short, with the present research project, I will experimentally measure the effectiveness of offensive memes as forms of ideological propaganda, leading respondents to accept the existence of harmful ideologies more willingly, through a process of normalization in current internet meme culture.

1.2 Relevance
The present research will be of an exploratory nature but is nonetheless not completely novel. Some research has already been conducted into the role that online communities - where memes proliferate - have played into radicalizing certain groups and people (Albrecht, Fielitz & Thurston, 2019; Benkler, Faris & Roberts, 2018; Christensen, Spahiu, Wilson & Duval, 2015). This research, however, has not focused on the specific impact of internet memes. While they were mentioned as taking a role, there were never the focus of the research. In addition, these studies have tended to be qualitative in their method, and 'after the fact' in their exploration. Their focus has been on things that happened.
	My research, in contrast, will instead focus on things that might happen, by focusing on the process itself, having broken it down to its basest elements. Similar research has already been conducted by Huntington (2019), but whereas she focused on political misinformation through memes specifically, I instead aim to focus on a more general ideological, rather than political, influence. In this way, it will be adopting a quantitative research method, something not often seen in online radicalization research. Further yet in the exploratory aspect, my research will be one with an experimental design, with clear conditions, stimuli, and statistically measured effects acquired in a clear testing environment unaffected by potential outside influence.
	Overall, existing online radicalization research, even when pertaining more specifically to the role played by internet memes, has nevertheless approached the topic in an after-the-fact manner through qualitative methods. A focus on the meta-memetic process of information dissemination (Merrin, 2019) can be more useful than a strict focus on internet memes when dissecting 'what happened', but tactics devised to combat this negative influence could then be countered by bad faith online actors, and put in simplest terms, the damage has 'already been done' by that point. A stricter focus on the influence offensive internet memes can have specifically, free of the influence of other contributing factors of online radicalization, could prove useful in the eventual development of a method to prevent this radicalization from growing beyond reasonable control. As meta-memetically-disseminated misinformation and disinformation has spread in recent years, the social utility of my research could provide a starting point for developing educational methods to combat 'meme fake news': By showing how the process of informational dissemination occurs in an experimental context, it would be possible to extrapolate to how it occurs on the internet at large, and methods to combat this process before it properly begins may then be conceptualized to protect the increasing number of people who are becoming active users of the participatory web.

1.3 Structure
The present research project will be exploring a significant amount of literature to justify its purpose and utility. To the average layperson, internet memes may not seem as posing a significant risk to those who view them. In order to credibly establish the risk they could pose, it is important to begin research with the foundational texts that will inform and legitimize the idea that internet memes can be powerful communication tools. As such, the following section of this paper will give an overview of existing theories of how ideas and culture spread, by exploring the development and legitimization of (classical) memetics as a theory of human culture. With this foundation laid out, I will then apply the research lens of memetics to the topic of internet memes, showing how wider culture and internet memes are similar, but also how they are different. In doing so, I will conceptualize a meta-memetic frame of analysis to be applied to internet memes, considering their highly self-referential (or meta-referential) and intertextual nature.
	Having justified the value of studying internet memes beyond the scope of humorous online cultural artefacts, and justified their validity as a new genre of online communication, I will show how their dissemination process can be 'hacked' to spread information, whether positive or negative. Through this hacking of the memetic process, I will demonstrate how internet memes can be powerful propaganda tools. In essence, I will show how the process of normalization I study has already happened, to justify the value of testing said process experimentally.
	The corpus of selected academic literature will provide a solid base upon which to build my study design. This research being quite exploratory, some leaps may be taken in the conceptualization of measures to measure internet meme literacy and perception of content as more 'normal' than other, but the general study design will be sound enough to allow future research to fine-tune and add to it, and attempt to replicate results. In the final sections of this research report, I will describe my dataset, the steps taken to prepare it for analysis, and the statistical tests that were ran, as well as their results. These results will be discussed within the context of the existing literature, and their limitations explored, before giving suggestions for future research into the topic of internet-meme-driven ideological propaganda.

2. THEORY

2.1 Introduction
Today, it could be reasonably stated that the term 'meme' has taken on a meaning that is quite different from originally intended. Indeed, prior to the colloquialization of the word to refer to humorous self-referential images under Web 2.0, meme would be used in the academic field of memetics, or in the study of how human culture spreads and is disseminated.
	Consider the process of genetic reproduction, in its simplest form. An individual possesses a particular genetic trait, and if they form a relationship with another individual and produce offspring, the gene will be passed down to their descendant, or it may not, depending on how the genetic material of both parents will influence the development of the child. This process happens to all living creature on earth. One must wonder, then, how non-genetic artefacts are passed down from one generation to the next. One such artefact is that of culture.
	Culture is not embedded genetically, and yet, it maintains itself throughout the generations. It changes, but if one were to trace back any culture throughout the years, they may see a logical progression. How, then, does such a transfer occur if cultural artefacts are not genetic? In one chapter of his 1976 seminal work The Selfish Gene, evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins (1976) sought to explore how such a non-genetic artefact as culture may spread between generations. To describe such a process, he wished to create a word that would be analogous - and therefore seemingly related - to gene, but used to describe non-genetic inheritance. From the Greek lexical root mimeme 'to imitate', Dawkins thought an appropriate monosyllabic word that would rhyme with gene was meme (p. 192).
	Before returning to the current, colloquial meaning of meme as online cultural artefact, we must briefly examine how the term, as well as the field of memetics, came to be relevant.

2.2 Classical Memetics
The focus of memetics is the exploration of how culture - a non-genetic artefact - is disseminated, both vertically across generations, and horizontally between peers. Citing previous research (Jenkins; referenced p. 189), Dawkins (1976) explains how the male saddleback bird native to New Zealand sings songs that are unique to certain groups or families of birds. These birds are part of different 'dialect groups', and specific songs are passed down from father to son, in a manner that can only be described as cultural reproduction. On occasion, errors are made in the process of learning songs, are not corrected, and these random mutations give rise to new songs, in a way that could be seen as similar to how human language and culture evolve (p. 190).
	Culture and cultural reproduction, therefore, are not unique to humans. What makes human culture unique, Dawkins (1976) argues, is its complexity. The complexity of human culture is also why he expresses his dissatisfaction in his fellow geneticists' explanation of human behaviour and culture as existing to ensure group survival through "reciprocal altruism" (p. 191) between members of small kin groups. This conception of cultural beliefs as facilitating biological (and therefore, genetic) survival fails to account for the complex differences between various ancient human cultures across the world. Culture, therefore, must be studied on its own terms, although the evolutionary process can provide a valid conceptual framework to study it.
	At its fundamental level, biological reproduction is a process of genetic imitation, the smallest unit of which is the gene. Cultural reproduction can then be reasonably assumed to also be a process of imitation, the smallest unit of which is the meme. Memes can be "tunes, ideas, catch-phrases, clothes, ways of making pots or of building arches" (Dawkins, 1976, p. 192). Similarly to how genes "propagate in the gene pool by leaping from body to body" via biological material, memes "propagate themselves in the meme pool by leaping from brain to brain" via imitation (p. 192). Memes can be more successful in propagating through the meme pool of human culture if they 'catch on', and their success at remaining in the meme pool can be measured along three different criteria; longevity (how long they stay relevant), fecundity (how 'catchy' they are), and copying-fidelity (how easily and faithfully they can be reproduced) (p. 194).
	In later writings, Dawkins (1999) himself will admit that his original conception of memes, cultural reproduction and memetics were quite "modest" (p. xvi), and that his original goal with the last chapter (in the original 1976 edition) of The Selfish Gene was not to provide a concrete "theory of human culture" (p. xvi), but to instead illustrate how the overall process of evolution was one of replication, and that many units of replication were possible, it just so happened that biological replication through genes came to be the dominant method on our planet. Memes were given as an example of a different kind of replicator, to illustrate his more general theory of 'universal Darwinism', or the "application of Darwinian thinking beyond the confines of biological evolution" (Blackmore, 1999, p. 5). 
	Ironically, the idea of meme caught on memetically, and memetics developed into a field that could potentially constitute a legitimate theory of human culture. Culture, as Dawkins (1976) explained in 1976, is not unique to humans, but innate imitation might be, as Susan Blackmore (1999, pp. 3-4) argues in her 1999 contribution to the developing field of memetics, The Meme Machine. In a simple but powerful example, she writes that if one "blinked, waved, or 'goo gooed', or even just smiled" (p. 3) at a baby, they would often imitate the behaviour right back, in a manner that comes so easily only to humans. When imitation occurs, something is passed on, to then "be passed on again, and again, and so take on a life of its own" (p. 4). That something is the meme. Memes, although carried and transmitted by hosts, tend to spread indiscriminately of their utility. They spread as if having a life of their own, whether they are "useful, neutral, or positively harmful to us", the latter of which can for instance be "chain letters, pyramid selling, new methods of fraud and false doctrines, ineffective slimming diets and dangerous medical 'cures'" (p. 7). 
	Although writing over 30 years after Dawkins' (1976) initial conceptualization of the concept and field of study, Blackmore (1999) did agree there still were problems to be resolved in the ongoing science of memetics, most important of which was giving an answer to the question "what really is the unit of the meme?" (p. 54). The answer to that, in short, is that no one really knows. Fellow memeticist Dennett (1995, p. 344; referenced p. 54) defined the unit of the meme as "the smallest elements that replicate themselves with reliability and fecundity", but Blackmore (1999) argues against this, with the example of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony. Is the meme the whole symphony, or its first - highly identifiable - four notes? The answer to this question is a socially defined one: Different people, with different life experiences and expertise, will consider the memetic unit of Beethoven's Fifth differently; musicians would think one way, laypeople another, and both can be correct. Just because an academic theory (such as memetics) is new and still unclear does not render it invalid or unworthy of further research (p. 56).
	At this point in the existing literature, the important points to remember are thus: Memes are socially defined, spread not necessarily because they are true but because they are catchy, and finally, they can group up to form self-reinforcing 'co-adapted meme complexes' (or memeplexes) that self-perpetuate throughout the meme pool. A few examples of successful memeplexes are religions, long-lasting scientific theories, or political ideologies (Blackmore, 1999, p. 65).
	The above characteristics of memes can be used to explain, for example, how superstitious beliefs can form. To strengthen the argument Blackmore (1999)  makes about this process, we must make a quick aside to the social psychology research theory of priming, used since the late 1970s to study "person perception, attitude activation, and stereotyping" (Dillman Carpentier, Roskos-Ewoldsen & Roskos-Ewoldsen, 2008, p. 186). As a theory rooted in "network models of semantic memory" (p. 187), priming experiments have shown that respondents who were exposed to a certain stimuli that activated one concept in their mind then had other, related concepts activated, which went on to influence information processing when considering later stimuli. In one such experiment, conducted by Srull and Wyer (1979), respondents were given four words ('he', 'Sally', 'hit', and 'kicked') and asked to construct a sentence, for which they only had two options ('He hit Sally' and 'He kicked Sally'). This process was shown to prime respondents by activating memory concepts of hostility and aggression, and they tended, in the next, seemingly unrelated experimental task, to skew towards hostile impressions of an ambiguously described person (Dillman Carpentier et al., 2008, p. 187). Later experiments in the field went on to demonstrate the networked nature of conceptual memory, where certain ideas can be seen to activate related ideas and influence later information processing. This network model of ideas and concepts, not unlike memeplexes, gives us a glimpse of how the memetic process can be 'hacked' to lead people to believe certain things. The experiment described above illustrates the main idea behind priming for the sake of clear explanation, but the process itself can take place more subtly: Gerend and Sias (2009), for example, demonstrated how the colour that surrounds a piece of information in the format in which it is presented can influence how respondents will process it. They also showed how framing a piece of information in a positive or negative light can change how later stimuli will be considered, even if the information itself was not modified. How an individual processes and interprets information can therefore be influenced by the framing of the information, as well as the context and format through which the information is presented, in addition to the processing influence exerted by that individual's knowledge and previous life experiences.
	Blackmore (1999) gives one example of a successful memeplex disseminated despite not being true in the case of alien abductions. Sleep paralysis has been a common human experience across the ages, perceived by sufferers as "buzzing and humming noises, vibrations of the body or bed, a powerful sense that there is somebody or something in the room with you, and strange lights floating about" (p. 176). Sexual arousal that sometimes happens in dreams can persist throughout the paralysis. Different cultures through history offered different (memetically successful) explanations of the event, one example being the "incubus and succubus of medieval times, [...] evil spirits sent to tempt the wicked into sexual activities" (p. 177). Within highly religious social contexts of the medieval era, the superstitious explanation for sleep paralysis was that of demons; in today's context of pop culture saturation of "outer space, spaceships, UFOs, and sinister aliens" (p. 177), the superstitious explanation becomes alien abductions. As such, previous knowledge (or lack thereof, in the case of scientific explanations for sleep paralysis or near-death experiences, another successful memeplex linked to religion), experiences, and general social and societal context can prime individuals to consider certain memes a certain way. The memetic process, then, can be taken advantage of, in this case by television companies looking to make money off sensational programming which plays into peoples' conspiratory and superstitious mindsets (p. 178).
	 Television executives have harnessed the power of the memetic process for the sake of increasing profits. On a more basic level than the one mentioned above, this harnessing can be as simple as an advertising jingle being catchy and memorable (Blackmore, 1999, p. 54). Other examples given by Blackmore (1999) of taking advantage of the memetic process for the sake of profits are divination and fortune-telling, astrology, or alternative medicine (pp. 182-186). Do, however, remember that memetic spread can happen independently of the meme carriers, so while the above entities may have taken advantage of the process, they may have done so unconsciously: If something worked, they simply kept doing it, even without understanding the intricacies behind it (p. 183). Further along the development of memetics as a scientific field, Conte (2001) rejected previous considerations of meme carriers (people) as passive and assigned to them a more active role in the memetic process. Rather than passive agents taking advantage of a process they may not understand to further their own goals, active agents can instead be seen as having weaponized the memetic process for personal benefit, or for the benefit of those they care about and wish to see succeed. In the analogy of television executives mentioned above, they can longer be seen as 'giving the people what they want' and profiting from it, but instead 'telling the people what they want', and the people accepting it, in a manner not unlike that of propaganda. Later explaining Conte's (2001) writing within the context of research into internet memes, Shifman (2014) explains that earlier memeticists saw individuals as simple vectors of cultural/memetic transmission, which happened regardless of their intentions, but later research reframed them as actors behind the process (p. 12), keenly aware of the process itself, and using that knowledge to their advantage.
	Knowing how the process of memetic dissemination takes place, how it can be weaponized by actors, and how priming theory tells us that different types of stimuli can influence processing and interpretation of later stimuli, we can begin to see the possible negative consequences for viewers of internet memes. Let us reconsider the experiment conducted by Srull and Wyer (1979): They showed that an initial stimuli which activated mental models of hostility and aggression affected how respondents considered later stimuli. With this process in mind, let us now consider how something similar could happen with internet memes: If an individual on the internet is part of an informal community where internet memes are strongly present, these memes would similarly activate certain mental models that could then affect how the individual user processes later information. If internet memes derive their humour from disparaging minority racial groups, for example, those who view them - even if they remain aware of the memes being 'jokes' - might have the offensive racist elements mentally normalized to a certain extent, and may therefore be primed to consider more extreme forms of racism (in internet memes or in other formats) as less offensive/harmful, and therefore 'more normal'.  Later sections of the present report will clarify the legitimacy of risk that offensive internet memes could pose, but we must nevertheless present here the first hypothesis of this research, as built on the first research question12, in order to justify the importance of priming as an overarching theory of weaponized memetic influence. 
Hypothesis 1: Respondents who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist internet memes were primed to perceive it as more normal, when compared to other groups.
      A detailed explanation and justification of the operationalization process will be given in later methodological sections, but it must be mentioned that the perceived normality in hypothesis 1 was conceptualized as higher perceived credibility of information and lower perceived harmfulness of information. Hypothesis 1, therefore, may be split thusly:
Hypothesis 1A: Respondents who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist internet memes were primed to perceive it as more credible, when compared to other groups.
Hypothesis 1B: Respondents who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist internet memes were primed to perceive it as less harmful, when compared to other groups. 
	With the internet becoming more widely used, Blackmore (1999) predicted that the memetic process would accelerate. She argues that as technology progressed, the process of memetic spread had perfected itself; "books, telephones, and fax machines" (p. 205) allowed greater fidelity, fecundity, and longevity of memetic artefacts. The internet, then, with its immateriality of storage and near-instantaneous transfer of information, seems like the next logical step in technological affordances for memetic spread. Later examining how the internet has changed the memetic process, Knobel (2006) gives us a glimpse of what would go on to encapsulate 'internet meme culture', when applying a memetic frame of analysis to early viral videos and internet memes. One of Knobel's (2006) key contribution to memetics as adapted to internet culture is an even greater focus than Conte's (2001) on the agency of the memes' disseminating agents. As described, one characteristic of successful memes is the sense of meaningfulness; "units of information that make more sense or are meaningful to a person and can be successfully imitated or reproduced will more easily become memes than units of information that are not easily copied or understood" (Knobel, 2006, p. 413). This characteristic can tell us two things: First, the more concise and easily transmittable a meme is, the more chances of success it has, and second, successful memes have a higher chance of success in groups that understand them more.  
	The internet, with its affordances of any layperson becoming a meaningful participant of 'the conversation', has reinforced the possibilities of in-group cohesion for people with fringe beliefs who found "people like me" (Knobel, 2006, p. 415), and in those informal belief-driven informal groups, memes that are transmitted by "trustworthy others" (Brodie, 1996, p. 152; referenced p. 415) who were also part of the group had a higher chance of proliferating. The online platforms these informal groups occupy can be referred to as "affinity spaces" (p. 415) for ideologically like-minded individuals, who through the space they shared, could feel more closely related than simply being two strangers on the internet.

2.3 Meta-Memetics
In the affinity spaces that Knobel (2006) describes, viral online content of the nature of what would eventually be considered an 'internet meme' proliferated. As she explains, "online, contributing directly to spreading a new, popular and catchy meme is considered cool, and generating an entirely new successful meme is even cooler" (p. 416).  Most importantly, however, "being among the first to spot a new, popular and catchy online meme is perhaps coolest of all" (p. 416). Through the fringe nature of early internet-meme-rich online affinity spaces and communities, as well, successful memes were "often absurdist in nature" and "closely akin to shared jokes between friends" (p. 416), exemplifying the strong communal aspect of these groups. 
	Knobel (2006) continues by giving two examples of successful pre-Web 2.0 internet memes, but before explaining them, it is important to clarify a logistical issue of the present text. In the previous section, examining the birth and early aspects of memetics, 'meme' was used to describe the meme as unit of cultural imitation, with 'internet meme' used to refer specifically to humorous self-referential units of online cultural imitation. As we move closer to present day in the literature, we must switch the definitions for the sake of reading and comprehension convenience. From this point forward, 'meme' will be used to refer to internet memes, and 'cultural meme' to refer to earlier conceptualizations of the term. 'Memetics' will continue to be used as it has been thus far.
	In the foreword of The Meme Machine, Dawkins (1999) summarised one of Blackmore's (1999) important contributions to memetics; differentiating between two types of cultural memetic imitation, copying-the-product and copying-the-instructions (p. xi). He asks readers to imagine an experiment: Two groups of twenty children are tasked with folding a sheet of paper in certain ways to create a paper crane. In group A, the first child makes the crane according to instructions, and the second child must replicate it without being given instructions, they can only look at the first child's completed crane. Each of the study participants must complete the crane only by looking at the previous participant's completed crane. This is copying-the-product. In group B, the first child is given instructions, completes their crane, then explains the instructions to the next child, and so on. This is copying-the-instructions. Dawkins (1999) argues that if such an experiment were conducted, the crane made by the last child of group A will plausibly look nothing like the first: A random error (mutation) along the way will have completely altered the final product. In group B, however, random mutations will not have been carried over, and the final crane should look mostly like the first. In copying-the-instructions memetic transfer, "the instructions are self-normalising" (p. xii), and a certain 'essence' of the product is transferred, unaffected by random errors and mutations. This separation helps us in understanding the two successful memes that Knobel (2006) explains. 
	When focusing on cultural memes, it seems natural to be thinking about the potential for random errors to irrevocably change the final product, although with internet memes, the point seems irrelevant. Copying-the-product becomes as simple as sharing an image or forwarding an email exchange, and other than some potential image compression artefacts, the final meme of this line of transmission will be the same as the first, so copying-the-product can therefore be reframed as sharing something 'as-is'. One such successful meme was an email exchange between student Jonah Peretti and Nike's email support (Knobel, 2006, p. 416). In 2001, the company ran a campaign of customer personalization, and Peretti placed an order for running shoes with the word 'sweatshop' embroidered on them. The sportswear company denied his request, and in the subsequent email exchange, the support worker seemingly avoided giving Peretti a specific reason as to why. After he shared it with a couple of friends, who shared it with a few people, who did the same, etc., the email exchange went viral13, seen by millions and giving Peretti media notoriety as having commentated on corporate worker exploitation in a manner that can also be described as "culture jamming" (Lievrouw, 2011, p. 79), a genre of new media activism which "takes the form of popular culture", yet aims to "subvert[ing] and critique[ing] that culture" (p. 73).  This meme, shared and disseminated as-is, exemplifies copying-the-product in an internet context. 
	The other successful meme described illustrates copying-the-instructions as applied to internet meme culture. In 2004, a hand-drawn flier was posted in the streets of Seattle. A 16-year-old autistic boy had made the flier after losing his toy frog. In September of that same year, an online user posted an picture of the flier, and members of that online space went on to create their own versions of the flier, pushing the meme into widespread virality, where all iterations collectively "narrate massive, albeit fictional, citizen mobilization in ongoing search for Hopkin Green Frog" (Knobel, 2006, p. 419). All these memes were different, but they all adopted the same 'format', in a sense all following the same instructions, yet remaining recognizable as individual instances of the 'same' meme.
	The recognizability of different iterations (or versions) of a meme as still all being 'the same meme', as well as the copy-the-instructions production process, seem to announce later research into the development of internet memes as a full-blown genre of online communication, with "its own set of rules and conventions" (Wiggins & Bowers, 2015, p. 1888), and which "obfuscate the consumer/producer binary" in a manner that is representative of Web 2.0 participatory culture as a whole (Jenkins, 2007; referenced p. 1888). Offering a higher degree of specificity in the analysis of online meme culture, Wiggins and Bowers (2015) differentiate between three 'phases' of a meme. At the earliest stage, there is a piece of digital content, one that can be easily shared, that becomes popular and widespread enough to be described as having gone 'viral'. At this stage, the content is described as "spreadable media" (p. 1897) and along the three memetic characteristics Dawkins (1976) described, it has low longevity (it may become incredibly popular for a short time, then fade back into obscurity), high fecundity (spreading fast and far), and high copy-fidelity (being shared as-is and not remixed or modified). Knobel's (2006) example of Jonah Peretti's email exchange would here be classified as spreadable media. The next stage is that of "emergent meme" (Wiggins & Bowers, 2015, p. 1897), where the initial content has been remixed, parodied, or modified in some way. The emergent meme has similar longevity and fecundity as spreadable media, but lower copy-fidelity, being a modification of the original content (though still recognizably related). The original Hopkin Green Frog flier would be classified as spreadable media, and its first few remixes as emergent meme. What moves content from emergent meme to "meme" (p. 1899) is its potential for further modification and iteration. When the emergent meme itself goes viral and is further iterated upon, through remix or parody, the intertextuality that is inherent to online meme culture (Shifman, 2014, p. 2) is intensely applied: Various disparate elements of existing memes are mixed in with every iteration of the new meme as it transitions out of its emergent status, thus cementing it as part of the 'meme canon' of the Internet. This meme, as part of the canon, will have high longevity, high fecundity, and simultaneous low and high copy-fidelity.
	The memetic process is "a product of the human capability to separate ideas into two levels - content and structure" (Rintel, 2013, p. 256), and this separation, echoing copy-the-product and copy-the-instructions dissemination, can illustrate how memes can be both high and low copy-fidelity. The structure of popular memes can give birth to new meme templates, which are specific formats used to structure a particular meme. The format or template of a meme, therefore, can be reproduced and disseminated with high copy-fidelity, even if the content itself is completely different each time (low copy-fidelity). One such structural element, Brideau and Berret (2014) explain, is the font that came to be the 'default' font of image macro memes. Image macros were one of the earliest forms of internet memes, which were simply images with a super-imposed text, text that would often, when combined with the image, be strongly representative of a particular emotional state (Rintel, 2013, p. 257).

       Figure 2.1: 'O RLY?', a 'classic' image macro meme (Rintel, 2013, p. 257).
 
Early instances of these memes, however, would not have been referred to as 'image macros', because the name came from the programming process behind their eventual standardization. In computer programming, macro instructions are "scripts that save time and effort for a programmer by replacing a lengthy or repetitive task with a set of defined procedures" (Brideau & Berret, 2014, p. 309). The creation of 'meme generators' was the result of this format standardization. Prior to this, the text could be anywhere on the image and use any font selected by the creator, but after, a certain 'look' of image macro memes came to be, with a more rigid top text/bottom text structure, and a specific font - capitalized IMPACT - becoming known as the 'meme font'. The rigidity of the structure of image macro memes facilitated the recognizability of any of these memes of a particular genre as 'a meme'. The stricter text format, as well, could be applied to any image, priming viewers to process the piece of content as a meme. Within the high copy-fidelity of structure, meme creators were afforded the opportunity of creating with low copy-fidelity, nevertheless having their creations recognized and remixed within the wider meme genre of image macros.

Figure 2.2: A meme using the 'Most Interesting Man in the World' template, exemplifying the standardized 'look' of image macro memes (Rintel, 2013, p. 259).

	Another high copy-fidelity structural element that allowed for low fidelity content creation within a recognizable genre, Douglas (2014) argues, is in the general aesthetic of memes, or more bluntly, how they are "supposed to look like shit" (p. 314). Image macros, described above, are one type of meme most recognizable as 'an internet meme' by mainstream media entities. The other most recognizable type is 'rage comics' and 'rage faces', which perfectly capture the "internet ugly" look that is unique to memes more generally. This important aesthetic characteristic of meme culture, Douglas (2014) explains, is a "celebration of the sloppy and the amateurish" (p. 314). Rage faces are "stick figures, crudely drawn faces, [and] cut-and-paste characters" (p. 317) that would be used by meme creators to share stories by assembling comic strips ('Rage comics') out of available elements. Whether the stories were real or not was irrelevant, what mattered was that they were funny, catchy, shareable, and their elements endlessly remixable, nevertheless maintaining their unique aesthetic. 

Figure 2.3: 'Waiter Rage', a classic rage comic strip featuring the 'original' rage face (bottom right), from which the genre of memes got its name (Douglas, 2014, p. 318).

	The specific look of internet memes in general, as well as their remixability of content within a more rigid templatability of format is what allowed their popularity, proliferation, and growth as a communication medium of the participatory internet. Through their celebration of aesthetic ugliness, as well, memes could be a form of bottom-up folk art (Shifman, 2014, p. 15), framed as existing in opposition to the clean and polished wider popular culture. This opposition may range from a passive one through internet ugly aesthetics to an active one taking the form of culture jamming (Lievrouw, 2011), reappropriating popular culture to create memes that commentate on said culture through the "absurdist' humour" (Knobel & Lankshear, 2007, p. 217) inherent to them. More so than cultural memes, the intertextuality of internet memes is a significantly important characteristic of their creation, how they are understood and interpreted, how they may be used as social commentary (Rintel, 2013, p. 252), and how they enable "potentially transgressive or empowering modes of communication and participation" (Vickery, 2014, p. 302). The internet meme examples given above are some of the most widely recognized genres of memes, but they may fail to properly illustrate the current complexity of online meme culture. Shifman (2014) illustrates the differences of meme complexity and the ease of understanding and creating them in her chapter on meme genres (pp. 99-118) by introducing the concept of literacy as applied to memes: as she explains, "different meme genres involve different levels of literacy" (p. 100), with some possibly understood and created by "almost anyone", and others requiring "detailed knowledge about a digital meme subculture" (p. 100). In a sense, therefore, the study of internet memes would benefit from being taken beyond the structural limitations of 'classical' memetics, to study the complex referential webs of meanings and possible uses they carry. These memes exist in a state of constant self-referentiality, simultaneously reinforcing and critiquing their own intricacies, in a manner that could then be best described as meta-referential.

2.4 Memetic Communities, the Lulz, & Trolling
The meta-referential nature of internet memes implies a certain level of involvement to be able to fully 'understand' them. A certain user involvement in the communities where they proliferate would be necessary for that user to be properly literate in how to use memes. As Knobel (2006) had already explained, the online affinity spaces where memes proliferate are imbued with a certain aura of exclusivity. Those not a part of the group would not 'get' the memes that are popular within that group. Even those in the group could be criticized as not understanding how to use a particular meme template the 'correct' way (Vickery, 2014). A predominant motivating logic behind these meta-memetic communities, in a way building upon the confrontational and fringe nature of these groups, is that of trolling and the 'lulz'.
	The lulz are "a spirited but often malevolent brand of humour etymologically derived from lol14" (Coleman, 2014, p. 4). The lulz characterise online meme communities in a way that builds upon the rigid in-group/out-group nature that defines them. As explained previously, these affinity spaces have often framed themselves as in some sort of opposition to normalcy. Even as they have grown out of their fringe status of the early internet, the overarching confrontational identity has remained. As such, a certain gatekeeping elitism permeates these communities, and jokes are therefore seen as acceptable to be made at the expense of those not in the group. Taken to its extreme, the confrontational mentality of the lulz becomes what is known as 'trolling'.
	While the lulz are characterized by a confrontational yet nonetheless playful humorous attitude towards certain people or groups outside of the community, trolling is significantly more mean-spirited, with 'trolls' deriving satisfaction or pleasure from actively offending and hurting others they consider 'lesser'. While there is no concrete way to accurately gauge the demographic percentages of these communities, Milner (2013, p. 70) found that they tended to be predominantly white and male, with whiteness and maleness assumed as the 'default' in the produced memetic content. The offensive content, as such, would tend to skew towards racist, sexist, and homophobic (to name a few) sentiments, directed at the 'other' implicitly assumed to not be part of the community. An important hub for meme emergence and trolling attacks towards other groups is 4chan, an anonymous imageboard forum founded in 2004. The forum is organized along different 'boards' that pertain to a particular kind of content. Its most popular board, however, is /b/ ('Random'), where 'anything goes' and which is often described, including by its members, as the "asshole of the internet" (Coleman, 2014, p. 4). On 4chan, any anonymous user may create a thread by posting an image and, optionally, adding some text next to it. Other users can then contribute to the thread with an image, text, or a combination of both. As a community, it is driven by a strong sense of ephemerality and anonymity. As Bernstein et al. (2011) showed, 4chan users are not even hiding behind usernames: On 4chan, almost all users are 'anonymous', to the point where a single person could make a whole thread replying to themselves while pretending to be multiple users, and none would be the wiser. The anonymity of 4chan affords its users a sort of unhinged chaos which greatly intensifies its trolling campaigns, and offensive content is rampant on the platform, thanks to its other characteristic, that of ephemerality. On 4chan, nothing is archived; if a thread reaches its post limit or goes too long without a reply (being replaced on the page by active threads), it disappears. Interestingly, the internet ugly aesthetic Douglas (2014) explained can be seen as a side effect of the ephemerality of 4chan; if any user spends too long crafting a meme to respond to a thread, the thread might have been deleted by the time they come back. The average lifespan of a /b/ thread, Bernstein et al. (2011, p. 4) showed, was only 3.9 minutes. These characteristics of 4chan have therefore influenced the overall attitude of its members. Put simply, no individual member can be directly identified, the content is not saved, and the offensive content can be defended as being 'just jokes', so the underlying attitude is one of a 'free-for-all' of offensive content created at the expense of a nebulous 'other'.
	Although other meme hub communities exist, the first and largest was /b/, where "memes are violently forged deep within the antagonisms of 4chan's /b/" (Milner, 2013, p. 87). The overarching attitude expressed in most memes that fit the trolling, antagonistic pattern of /b/'s memes, then, would subtly reinforce and replicate the underlying ideological attitudes behind /b/. One such other community is reddit, which despite not benefitting from 4chan's anonymity and ephemerality, nonetheless can reproduce its harmful behaviours. Massanari (2017), examining the site in the wake of the sexist hate/trolling campaigns that emerged out of it, appropriately coined the phrase "toxic technocultures" (p. 329) to describe these hubs, in which harmful and anti-feminist masculinities form and are self-reinforced through ideological group cohesion (Ging, 2019). Reddit users are 'traceable' in a way that 4chan users aren't, but there are also no strictly enforced limits to how many usernames a Reddit user can create, and any user on the platform may create their own self-contained community ('subreddit'), where themes can be anything that isn't explicitly illegal. Milner (2013, p. 88) gives the example of r/Creepshots, a (now banned) subreddit where users would post sexualizing pictures taken of women without their consent. Following the deletion of r/Creepshots for illegal and offensive content, its users created r/CandidFashionPolice, where the content was the exact same, but framed as critiquing the fashion choices of women - in sexualizing pictures taken without their consent.

2.5 Misinformation
Ideological group cohesion was described above as an underlying element of meta-memetic communities, but it is important to note that it is not exclusive to these communities, online. Kata (2012) showed for example that under the participatory paradigm of Web 2.0, there has been growth of the anti-vaccination 'movement', whose members are together ideologically driven in their scientific scepticism, spreading scientific misinformation which can have a very real negative effect on the public's trust in healthcare science. She argues that as the internet grew in popularity and became open to more and more individuals contributing to the wider online discourse, an overarching attitude of everybody being an "expert" (p. 3779) arose. The "connective power of the Internet" (p. 3779) allowed individuals whose beliefs would previously be considered "fringe" (conspiracy theorists, for example) to find each other and form affinity spaces (Knobel, 2006) where their misinformed opinions (cultural memes) would spread. As such, the participatory internet has led to a sort of informational overload, where the "infinite personalized truths" each become "portrayed as legitimate", therefore "weakening messages from qualified experts" (Kata, 2012, p. 3779) by being contrasted to them. 
      The anti-vaccination movement is the example that Kata (2012) uses, but the information overload inherent to the participatory internet can also be seen as having contributed to the proliferation of fake news, a process in which internet memes can play a part as well. Here, the internet memes described are not necessarily humorous online cultural artefacts of the kind extensively explained previously, but they disseminate information in just the same way. Keeping with the example of the scientific scepticism expressed in anti-vaccination affinity spaces and shared through their memes, an average online user would not necessarily have their opinions of healthcare science changed from a single shared meme, but that single meme may cast enough of a doubt in their mind to lead them to search for more information on vaccines, a process which would lead them to anti-vaccination communities - where the ideological strength of a community might convince them - before being led to scientific data. This also plays into the conspiratory mindset of believers in the alien abduction memeplex that Blackmore (1999) described: the cultural meme (the information) would not necessarily spread because it is true, but because it is catchy, and (mis)information using 'common-sense language' to discredit experts would be catchier than the dry, academically presented research of said experts. The communities of healthcare science sceptics, as well, may imbue members with a feeling of being 'in the know' in a way that most people wouldn't, exclusivity also being 'catchy', in a sense. Even if reading of an anti-vaccine website would not motivate someone to join the community, its influence can still have an impact: Research has indeed shown a mere 5 to 10 minutes of viewing such websites measurably increased the perceived risks attached to vaccines in respondents (Kata, 2012, p. 3780). Online misinformation, in a sense, does not work by changing people's mind in a single memetic instance, but works by normalizing the misinformation, conveying it in common sense language, presenting it in a catchy manner, and doing so over a long enough time period that people's minds might be changed with the misinformation becoming the 'norm' of what they see. Furthermore, under Web 2.0's subtle assumption of "everybody [being] an expert" (Kata, 2012, p. 3779), misinformation that is not believed may still lead individuals to be sceptical and critical of any information, no matter the legitimacy of its source.
	Expanding on what Kata's (2012) research showed, Alvermann (2017) more generally explained how the participatory paradigm normalized by social media made it particularly easy to "surround yourself with others who think like you" (p. 335), an environment in which sharing content in line with those like-minded people "creates the opportunity for an instantaneous positive feedback loop that can perpetuate poor decision making" (p. 335). In this online media environment, she argues, has culminated in our current "post-factual" context, where debate and discussion has become framed by "appeals to emotion" (Alvermann, 2017, p. 336) of like-minded people, rather than revolving around factual information. It is in this environment that fake news proliferates.

2.6 Disinformation, Propaganda, & Radicalization
The previous subsection illustrated the post-factual status of today's online media environment. In such an environment, it has become much easier for members of meta-memetic communities to spread misinformation and offensive content through memes 'for the lulz', but under the more aggressive attitude of trolling, as combined with a growing lack of critical examination of information brought on by an attitude of distrust towards experts and a reinforcement of conspiratory mindsets through like-minded communities, trolls have weaponized spreading misinformation, therefore turning it into disinformation. Although both play a role in the spread of fake news in our post-factual era, misinformation is more passive in its un-truth: To refer back to Kata's (2012) example of anti-vaccine communities, members would spread information that is indeed wrong, but that they would nevertheless genuinely believe themselves, framing it as common-sense knowledge because to them, it very well may be. Remember Blackmore's (1999) example of fortune-telling, astrology, and alternative medicine (pp. 182-186), explained previously: the misinformation was disseminated passively by actors who may have been unaware of the memetic process, and simply have been doing 'what works.' Disinformation, in contrast, is more active in its falseness, and akin to propaganda in its dissemination process: For the case of 4chan trolls spreading fake news, for example, they would do so with the full awareness of the falseness of the information, seeking only to sow chaos for the sake of comedy or 'for the lulz'.
	As was previously explained, internet memes may be offensive in nature, and reflect the harmful ideologies of the communities that birthed them, but would remain interpretable as 'just jokes' and satirical to a certain extent. Echoing Blackmore's (1999) point of memetic understanding being greatly influenced by the individual's knowledge and past experiences, however, Johnson, del Rio and Kemmitt (2010) showed that satire can lead to a widely complex range of responses in audiences. They explained that satirical texts - and irony more generally - can be polysemic in its understanding and polyvalent in its interpretation (p. 396). Polysemy "refers to the possibility that a text will have multiple meanings" while polyvalence "to how a text might be understood by viewers in a similar way but evaluated differently" (Johnson, del Rio & Kemmitt, 2010, p. 396). What the authors found was that satire - of the kind that could be applied to offensive internet memes - could act as an ideological reinforcement for those "in the know" (p. 397), even if they missed the satirical intention of the text. In simpler terms, with this idea applied to offensive memes, it would be possible for an offensive meme to have been intended as a joke, but a viewer could 'miss' the satirical intent because they hold the harmful belief the meme satirizes, so the meme would act as ideological reinforcement, and the community reinforcement would have a radicalizing effect of intensifying harmful beliefs. 
	 When writing about cultural memes, Conte (2001, p. 102) illustrated that while memetic agents act in a self-interested manner to achieve their own goals, they will also adapt and adopt the goals of those in their group to achieve said goal, even if they do not believe in the group's goals. This aspect of cultural memetic transmission can be applied when considering the assumed 'default' user of meta-memetic communities. Milner (2013) and Massanari (2017) together showed that the 'average' user of meme hub communities would be male, straight, and white, expressing prejudice in the offensive content as directed to the most likely 'other' of a straight, white, male audience; women and ethnic minorities. A reasonable assumption to be made, however, is that not all users fit the above default stereotype, though they would most likely not express their 'otherness' within the community unless they feel the need. One must ask themselves, then, how they can be exposed to the offensive content seemingly directed at them without internalizing the negative information in a way that affects their sense of self-worth. There are multiple possibilities for this, but within the context of the present research, the one that will be focused on is the internalized considerations of these offensive memes being 'just jokes', no matter how hurtful.
	In contrast to priming, another social psychology research field that will be useful here is that of inoculation theory. Inoculation can be conceptualized as a kind of memetic (in the cultural, idea sense) immunization, almost like a vaccine for the mind. The offensive meme content that 'othered' users would be exposed to, through their active expectation of it being meant as hurtful, will inoculate them against being affected by ideologically similar content in other formats. Roozenbeek et al. (2020) studied how one can be inoculated against being convinced by fake news content, and one method, they found, was for research participants to be familiar with the mechanism and processes through which fake news spread, rather than being familiar with factually correct information to counter the misinformation. This 'prebunking' was indeed effective, but a better method of protecting against fake news, they found, was for one to know how fake news take form and spread. To apply this concept of inoculation to internet memes more generally, remember Shifman's (2014) point on literacy (p. 100): different meme genres/formats will be understood and used by users who are appropriately literate in their usage. If mis/disinformation is presented in a particular meme format, therefore, individuals equipped with the appropriate meme literacy would be inoculated against the offensive/harmful information expressed in the meme. Banas and Rains (2010), in their meta-analysis of research on inoculation theory, found that people with ideologically opposing beliefs to those of the information presented were more likely to not be influenced. This ideological inoculation, when applied to offensive memes, can further illustrate how marginalized (in regards to the content) community members may defend against the harmful messages, but also how those outside the community, lacking literacy to understand the content's satire, may be further radicalized in their beliefs.
	The manner through which online users who are more 'in the know', of the tactics employed by trolls in spreading harmful information, can more efficiently reject the harmful message and not let them influence them through a normalization effect, can be useful in the formulation of this research's second hypothesis, aiming to answer its second research question15. Similarly to hypothesis 1, the concept of perceived normality was split as higher perceived credibility of information and lower perceived harmfulness of information. Hypothesis 2 can therefore be expressed thusly:
Hypothesis 2A: Respondents with high internet meme literacy who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist internet memes were inoculated against perceiving it as more credible, and therefore considered it less credible, when compared to other groups.
Hypothesis 2B: Respondents with high internet meme literacy who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist internet memes were inoculated against perceiving it as less harmful, and therefore considered it more harmful, when compared to other groups.
      Offensive memes shared by trolls as part of disinformation campaigns could appeal to those who legitimately hold the harmful beliefs, and the communal influence of fringe ideologies found online could then act as a self-reinforcement mechanism of the radicalizing effect of the harmful ideology. Meta-memetic communities like 4chan are not necessarily driven by a particular ideology, but instead by the drive to sow chaos (Merrin, 2019, p. 203) in existing social and informational systems, an attitude evocative of the main motivation behind trolling, as well. Although not politically engaged in a traditional manner other than whichever ideology will be most disruptive in the context of disinformation and trolling campaigns, the political alignment of 4chan trolls has, in recent years, been that of right-wing extremism, reframed as 'alternative right' or 'alt-right', named so after the small subset of right-wing politicians espousing white nationalist rhetoric disguised in 'common sense' and 'intellectualizing' language in order to appeal to a mainstream audience. The alt-right community has in recent years taken advantage of the United States' resurgence of pro-white rhetoric (Hartzell, 2018, p. 6), which seems to have aligned with these meta-memetic communities' 'default' racial identity of 'whiteness', as well as with the harmful racist ideologies expressed in some of their offensive memes. As such, Hartzell (2018) explained, the community of nihilistic trolls of the alt-right has been folded into existing structures of white nationalism and white supremacy. Within these structures, some university circles of like-minded white nationalist/white supremacist individuals had been trying to spread their ideology through linguistic masking of their more extreme views, but they may not have been as efficient in normalizing this kind of language and content as alt-right trolls have been in their disinformation push of offensive content, especially racist content, which has also seemingly acted as ideological reinforcement for isolated like-minded individuals, finding strength in previously fringe groups.
      


3. METHODS

3.1 Introduction
Based on the examined literature, we can see how, while offensive memes would play a comparatively small role in the normalizing effect of harmful ideologies, they can play enough of a role that it becomes important to protect users from that effect. As such, this research aimed to verify whether this normalizing effect would be significant enough to be measurable. The main idea is that respondents exposed to racist memes first were primed to perceive later text as 'more normal'. To reiterate, the main research question of this project is as follows:
To what extent does the exposure to a harmful idea through internet memes influence the later acceptance of that same idea as normal, in different formats?
	To answer the first research question, two related hypotheses were devised, each pertaining to one of the two variables together deemed representative of perceived normality in the context of an experimental survey:
H1A: Respondents who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist internet memes were primed to perceive it as more credible, when compared to other groups.
H1B: Respondents who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist internet memes were primed to perceive it as less harmful, when compared to other groups.
      As what demonstrated from the literature review, however, the extent to which a person is familiar with the structure and 'language' of internet memes would protect them from the normalizing ideological effect of offensive memes. A high meme literacy would therefore inoculate respondents against the harmful ideologically normalizing effects the first research question addresses. To test this, the second research question of this project is as follows:
To what extent does high internet meme literacy protect viewers from accepting a harmful idea as normal, if initially exposed to it through internet memes?
	To answer it, two related hypotheses were devised, each, again, pertaining to one of the two variables conceptualized as measuring perceived normality:
H2A: Respondents with high internet meme literacy who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist internet memes were inoculated against perceiving it as more credible, and therefore considered it less credible, when compared to other groups.
H2B: Respondents with high internet meme literacy who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist internet memes were inoculated against perceiving it as less harmful, and therefore considered it more harmful, when compared to other groups.
	As was explained in the theory section of this report, plenty of research has been conducted into the radicalizing and propaganda effect that online meta-memetic communities have had. Most of the research, however, has been of a qualitative research design. The focus, as well, has tended to be on the communities, rather than the memes themselves. Although there has been some quantitative research conducted, the general design would seem less prevalent than qualitative in the study context of internet memes and their communities. Huntington's (2019) research explored the effect that memes could have in regards to information processing, in a research design similar to what was chosen here, but her research was specific to political communication, mis/disinformation in fake news memes, and how this information would be processed when compared to non-meme fake news content. Instead of this focus on political content, my research instead approaches the issue of internet memes affecting perception of information through a broader lens, by examining this effect in a wider, ideological context.
	To test hypotheses and answer the research questions they relate to, an online experimental survey design was deemed most appropriate. There are, however, still limitations to such a design in replicating the conditions under which participants would experience offensive memes and their effects online, but they will be addressed in detail later. This quantitative design was selected for being the "primary tool for studying causal relationships" (Babbie, 2014, p. 255), where manipulating conditions would be possible to reduce the risk of confounding effects (Neuman, 2014, p. 319). The main experimental goal of the survey had to be initially hidden from participants - although they were debriefed after - to not affect results, so a between-subjects design was chosen; different participants were randomly assigned to different experimental condition groups, and their results were then compared using statistical analysis program SPSS. The survey was distributed online in order to - as much as possible - replicate the conditions under which participants would encounter memes (offensive or otherwise), as it was deemed the context of in-person testing at a university lab would affect results by priming participants to be more mindful of their responses.

3.2 Sampling & Data
As an increasing number of people are beginning to be involved in the participatory internet through the affordances of social media, they are also being potentially exposed to more and more misinformation in the form of memes. The target population of such a study, then, would be anyone on the internet who has some level of active involvement in social media groups. 
	Within the context of the small exploratory study this research is, however, it was unfortunately not possible to obtain a representative sample of such a population. The experimental survey of this study, hosted on survey platform Qualtrics, was distributed through two posts - made three days apart - on the r/SampleSize subreddit, where users share their research surveys in search for participants. The survey link was also posted to a selection of five Facebook 'survey sharing' groups, where mostly students share their research projects in looking for participants.
      Both avenues of posting allowed me to collect data from a wider ideologically driven variety of respondents than if the survey was shared to more specifically left or right-leaning platforms, for instance, but the platforms and groups meant that most respondents were nonetheless of a particular 'type' in a way that meant the sample was not accurately representative of the population. Reddit being a meme hub, respondents obtained there could be reasonably assumed to know more about memes than the average member of the target population. Similarly, the selected Facebook group members tended to be students, who could also be assumed to know more about memes than the average person. As was explained from Milner's (2013), Massanari's (2017), and Ging's (2019) research, the reddit userbase would tend to be mostly male, white, and straight, so the sample obtained from the site would tend to skew towards those demographics, although the survey being posted on an 'ideologically neutral' subreddit like r/SampleSize would at least minimize this bias to a certain extent. The sample obtained from Facebook would be more demographically varied than from reddit, but it could still be assumed that respondents obtained there would be younger than the studied population, considering the selected groups being mostly aimed at students. The sampling process, in conclusion, was to an extent a convenience sample, obtained from online environments most likely to bring in more respondents quicker, at the expense of - potentially- obtaining a representative sample.
      Following data collection, a total of 134 complete responses were obtained. More partial responses were available from respondents who quit the survey after the testing phase. These responses could have been used in the statistical analyses, but it was decided not to do that. The consent form told participants that they may withdraw their consent at any time by quitting the survey. It could be reasonably assumed that respondents who quit at 97 or 98%, when being asked about what they thought the study purpose was, could have thought they had reached the end of the survey. Just to be safe from potential ethics concerns, however, these responses were not used. 
	As allowed by Qualtrics in the settings of survey creation, a 'force response' option was enabled for all sections except for the demographic one. For privacy concerns, it was deemed better to not force respondents to give this sort of information, even when 'Prefer not to answer' was available as an option. Considering the ethics requirement of participants being older than 18, however, respondents who did not give their age were excluded, and their responses deleted from the working dataset. For further analysis, the final sample (N= 130) constituted the usable dataset. 
      In the final sample (N= 130), 41.5% (54 participants) identified as male, 50.8% (66) identified as female, and 7.7% (10) selected another option when asked about their gender identity. A majority of respondents identified as white (77.7%, 101 participants). The median age of respondents was 23.5 years old. Most respondents (53.1%, 69 participants) self-reported as having some undergraduate (Bachelor's Degree) university education (37 participants) or as having completed undergraduate university education (32). The next most represented education level was having completed postgraduate (Master's Degree and beyond) university education (20.8%, 27 participants). Most respondents identified as left-wing, politically (69.2%, 90 participants). 16.9% of respondents identified as right-wing (22 participants), 5.4% (7) as neither left nor right leaning (centre), and 8.5% (11) did not answer the political ideology self-identification question.
	The final sample was mostly representative of the studied population regarding gender identity, but otherwise, the demographic distribution tended to skew towards a white racial identity, a relatively young age, and at least some university education. The final sample, as such, was unfortunately not representative of the studied population. One way this could be countered, would this research project be repeated, is by attaining participants from a wider and more varied list of online platforms, and by running the data collection phase for longer.

3.3 Structure & Manipulation
In order to obtain the valid results most sought after in quantitative experimental research, the structure of the survey had to be made quite simple, to minimize the risk of confounding variables affecting the results. It was necessary, as well, to give a "cover story" (Geuens & De Pelsmacker, 2017, p. 88) as to the purpose of the research, since an awareness of its experimental nature would influence the results. This also meant that the design had to be a between-subjects one, as a within-subjects design would invalidate the potential effect studied with respondents being aware of the purpose in the second phase of testing. Ethical concerns of respondents being 'tricked' were raised, but participants were debriefed as to the actual research purpose when finishing the survey. Geuens and De Pelsmacker (2017) explain that in experimental survey research, it is of particular importance that participants be debriefed as to the true study intention, especially if they have been given "false information" (p. 88). In the context of the present research, a debriefing was also necessary to minimize the risk of participants becoming distressed through exposure to offensive content.
      In section (1), respondents were given the cover story, that the survey was meant to study the perception that people of different backgrounds have of offensive internet memes, then were asked to accept the consent form, which emphasized the potential psychological distress that the content shown could cause them. Section (2) contained a standard set of demographic questions; age, highest attained educational degree, country of residence, gender, and racial identity. Section (3) contained a set of questions to gauge the respondent's ideological positioning; first, they were asked to self-identify their political leaning on a scale from 1 ('extreme left') to 11 ('extreme right'), with 6 representing the centre, based on Kroh's (2007) conclusion as to the importance of mid-points in political ideology scales. Section (3) also featured a selection of five statements, taken from Manganelli Rattazzi et al.'s (2006) shortened version of the right-wing authoritarianism (RWA) scale, to which respondents had to indicate their level of agreement on a 7-point Likert scale ('Strongly Agree' to 'Strongly Disagree'). Although it would have been interesting to see how a combination of left-right and authoritarian-libertarian respondent placement could have influenced results, time constraints for the survey length meant that it was not possible to use the full scale, or even a full subscale. The statements, then, became part of the cover story given to respondents.
	Section (4) was when responses began mattering for the context of the study. To measure respondent internet meme literacy, a selection of four image macro meme images (text-less) was made: Confession Bear, Socially Awkward Penguin, Foul Bachelor Frog, and Overly Attached Girlfriend were selected. Vickery (2014) explained the meaning and intricacy of use of the first three in her research. The fourth was selected due to its large popularity at the time. Three questions were asked about each; the first was about the emotion or attitude that would be best expressed with the template, with four possible answers, only one of which being 'fully' incorrect; the second was the likeliness of the respondent finding a meme using that template funny, answered on a 5-point scale ('Extremely Likely' to 'Extremely Unlikely', with a sixth 'n/a' answer if they did not know the meme); and the third was the ease through which they would be able to create a meme using the template the 'correct' way, answered on a 5-point scale ('Extremely Easy' to 'Extremely Difficult', again with a sixth 'n/a' option).
	Following section (4), a randomizer was applied in Qualtrics, with respondents sorted into four different condition groups for section (5). In condition (1), respondents were shown a selection of five offensive memes (one homophobic, one racist and transphobic, three racist), then a short paragraph of offensive text taken from an ideologically white nationalist article (Spraguer, 2018). The non-racist offensive memes were added as filler items to contribute to the cover story of the research being about offensive memes generally, not specifically racist memes. In condition (2), the order was reversed, and respondents saw the text first, then the memes. Those were the testing conditions. Condition (3) respondents were shown only the memes, and in condition (4), only the text. Those were the control conditions. All stimuli in section (5) had the same two questions; how credible respondents thought the information presented was (5-point response scale from 'Extremely Credible' to 'Extremely not Credible' with a sixth 'n/a' option for non-comprehension); and how harmless/harmful they thought the content was (on a scale from 1 'harmless' to 11 'harmful').
	Section (6) was common across all participants, and three (of the five in the stimuli) memes were shown; these three memes were the racist ones. For each, respondents were asked if they understood the conveyed information, and if they answered no, an explanation of the offensiveness was shown. Respondents were then asked a single question, about what they thought the intent behind that specific memes creation was, with five response options ('Satire', 'Offense for the sake of comedy', Offense for the sake of hurting others', 'Expression of genuine personal beliefs', and 'Not sure'). In section (7), the final section, respondents were first asked if they had 'figured out' the study purpose, with an optional open text box, then were debriefed by being told the actual experimental purpose of the study, then linked to the websites of two NGOs which aim to combat racism (European Network Against Racism: enar-eu.org ) and transphobia (Transgender Europe: tgeu.org ), in order to dispel potential harmful information they may have internalized after participating in the study. To maximize response rate and to keep in line with survey length requirements of such a study done in the context of academic student research, the survey was kept to an average length of 10 minutes to be completed. Across the respondent pool, the median time taken to complete it was 9.1 minutes. Although the survey was described here, it can be found in its entirety, as it was presented to respondents, in Appendix A.

3.4 Stimuli
To reflect the literature, it was important to select internet memes that could reasonably be perceived as having been intended to be jokes. As explained in the previous section, the ideological undertones of offensive memes would tend to be reflective of the ideological undertones of the communities out of which they came. Although Geuens and De Pelsmacker (2017, pp. 85-86) explain the value of experimental researchers creating their own stimuli in order to minimize confounding effects, I eventually decided against it. Their work dealt with advertising research, but their insights can still be useful: As they explain, conducting research sometimes benefits from conceptualizing non-existent brands. If real brands are used, study participants may have existing associations with, or feelings towards them, invalidating results and study conclusions. This idea could have been useful here. However, I eventually decided against it, as creating offensive memes could mean that my own biases and ideology could be subconsciously implemented in them. In a future study featuring an extended version of the study design and a solid pilot testing phase, offensive memes created strictly for the purpose of experimental research could be useful: Future research could, for example, create memes with very specific types of prejudices, as well as different intensities of expression and clarity of said prejudices in the memes. For now, though, offensive memes were sought out on the online platforms where it would be more likely to find them; reddit, 4chan's /pol/ ('Politically incorrect') board, and a few far-right-leaning 'Patriot' Facebook pages, where racist memes tend to be quite present. A large amount of these memes was saved before going through a selection procedure that eventually resulted in the five used in the experiment being selected. Unfortunately, sourcing and referencing were not properly conducted at the time of collection, so there is no way to report from where the memes came specifically. In the context of internet meme research, however, this would not be a problem, as memes proliferate in a manner that would invalidate the need for viewers of them to go to a specific place, online, to be exposed to them. It is indeed true that someone who would not frequent the more offense and dark humour-driven subcommunities of reddit and 4chan would have a lower chance of seeing these types of memes, but there cannot be a guarantee that they would never see them. It therefore proved useful to not create memes for the purpose of the experiment, and to instead use those 'found in the wild', to reflect what the average online user could encounter.
	Although the research focused specifically on a single type of prejudice and offensiveness of content - racism - in order to avoid potential confounding effects of the study pertaining to multiple kinds of prejudice, some offensive memes other than racist had to be chosen to contribute to the cover story of the study being about offensive memes generally. The final selection of memes can be found in the survey in appendix A, but two of them can here help in illustrating the type of meme content which was sought after to use as stimuli. Figure 3.1 below can help illustrate how offensive humour in memes can easily be perceived as a harmful insult, or a harmless joke. The information conveyed in the meme is quite clear; young people of today, according to the meme creator, abandon religion and embrace homosexuality. This could be interpreted as a homophobic insult, but it could also be interpreted as some kind of satirical statement. This meme does well to illustrate how people of different backgrounds and life experiences may receive and interpret it differently. The context in which this meme is found, as well, could prime viewers to interpret it differently: If found in the comments section of an article on homosexuality being sinful, on a far-right religious blog, for example, the perceived intent behind its creation and the viewer's interpretation of it would be quite different than if found in the comments of an article about Gay Pride and the negative, albeit slowly diminishing protest against it as a social movement. In one instance, this meme would be an insult, in another, a joke that could even be interpreted as positive reinforcement of LGBTQ+ group identity, a once demonized minority group.

       Figure 3.1: A homophobic meme.

      The two examples of possible interpretations, expressed above, are quite extreme, but their aim it to illustrate a point explained by Blackmore (1999) about cultural memes, as applied to internet memes, and reinforced by priming theory: understanding and interpretation are highly dependent on framing, the viewer's ideological and intellectual baggage, and cultural contextual elements. The second example, seen in Figure 3.2, can also illustrate how differing interpretations can take place depending on the viewer's knowledge and existing ideology. Here, the comic/meme is shown in its original horizontal format, but in the survey, the panels were rearranged vertically to better fit the screen of respondents participating through their phones. Upon rearranging, as well, it was deemed appropriate to erase the website url, as the creator of Stonetoss draws extremely offensive and problematic comics, expressive of a bigoted extreme-right ideology. Wanting to protect respondents who may have suffered significant psychological and emotional distress visiting that website, I considered it acceptable to erase the url.

	Figure 3.2: A racist and anti-Semitic meme.

	The information expressed in this meme is significantly more extreme in its offensiveness than the meme shown in figure 3.1. Here, what is represented is the extreme-right conspiracy theory of 'white genocide', which can be summarised thus: As more people of non-white ethnicities 'mix in' with a predominantly 'white' population, 'whiteness' (an abstract notion of it) becomes reduced, up to the point of disappearance. An element of fascist ideology, 'white genocide' essentially means that as more non-white people reproduce and birth children with white people, whiteness will disappear. Whiteness, therefore, must be 'preserved' and 'maintained' through aggressive anti-immigration policy, for believers of this conspiracy theory. Further adding to the intensity of hate speech expressed, the last panel links to another fascist conspiracy, the 'Jewish conspiracy', which implies that Jewish people secretly control the world from 'behind the scenes'. All in all, this comic conveys that white genocide is orchestrated by the Jewish people who control the world, in order to eradicate whiteness.
	This meme is quite extreme, but also quite subtle in the expression of its message, something also seen in the survey results, where 41.5% of respondents (54 participants) selected the n/a option ('I do not understand this meme') when asked about the credibility of information conveyed. This is unfortunate, and indicative of the need for extensive pilot testing, would this research be repeated, but this meme can still help us understand how they can be used for hate speech dissemination understandable only by those 'in the know' of the extremist communities where this meme could be found. As seen from the majority of respondents not understanding it, the average web user might not understand the information conveyed, but the meme, through its spread, could nonetheless contribute to the ideological group cohesion of the extremist users 'in the know', who would understand it. The hate speech expressed, however, could also be considered as so extreme as to have actually been intended as satire. Following the testing phase, although a majority of my survey respondents, when asked about what they thought the intent behind this meme was (after being told what the conveyed information was), thought it to be 'expression of genuine personal beliefs' (46.1%, 60 participants) or 'offense for the sake of hurting others' (23.1%, 30 participants), some still saw it as satire (8.5%, 11 participants). For this meme specifically, the satirical potential would indeed be difficult to see, but it nonetheless, when considered along with Figure 3.1's potential satire, can be illustrative of the typical defence of 'it's just jokes' that would be used by members of hateful meme communities when they come under criticism. Put simply, hate speech can only be policed as such when it undeniably is hate speech, not when doubts can be cast as to the intent behind it.
	These two above memes are good illustrators of how offensive memes can be used to disseminate harmful ideologies concisely and efficiently, how they therefore can contribute to online radicalization by acting as group reinforcement for those 'in the know', and how they cannot be easily policed, due to their muddled intent and how it is highly dependent on context. Along with the other three similarly 'typed' memes which can be found in Appendix A, they made up the 'meme' stimuli of this experimental survey. The purpose of this study was specifically related to offensive racist memes affecting processing of hateful text shown later. As such, in order to avoid potential confounding effects from the order of the stimuli memes, they were presented in the same order for every experimental condition. 
	Originally, when initially conceptualizing the format of this research, the intention was to select a few pieces of text from more mainstream (yet still far-right and expressive of racist ideologies) sources. Under constraints of keeping the survey under a certain length, however, only one piece of text was used. In the end, it was deemed too difficult to find a piece of text that would simultaneously express a racist ideology and be subtle enough to be 'accepted' (in the sense of 'not actively rejected') by a more mainstream audience, from a mainstream source. After finding and reading Hartzell's (2018) paper on the 'intellectualizing' of white nationalism and of the kind of information that would eventually be shared as memes by far-right trolls in the 'alt-right', it was deemed appropriate for a short piece of text to be selected from that platform, alternativeright.com. The source of the text was not given in the survey, but the source itself was considered appropriately 'niche' and 'fringe' for the text (and therefore, source) to not be recognized by respondents, something that could have potentially led to confounding effects and an invalidation of results. The short text paragraph that was selected can be found below. It also expresses, at its core, a belief in the 'white genocide' conspiracy theory, but does so more subtly, masking the prejudice behind an aura of intellectualism and 'common sense' language, in order to appeal to a more mainstream audience and to enact a normalizing effect of this type of ideology, to later make more extreme and extremely-expressed forms of prejudice more 'palatable' and easily accepted. In a sense, what my research attempts to demonstrate with offensive memes priming respondents to be accepting of textual stimuli such as this text, this text seems to attempt to do as well, priming readers to be more accepting of more extreme and radicalizing forms of prejudice. 
'One of the chief forms of racial discrimination, for example, is exclusion. However, a total lack of exclusion/separation is an invitation to miscegenation, to cultural disintegration via borrowing and mixing, to the rewriting and rereading of one's history, to the complete loss of identity, etc. Without any barriers to entry into a group, the group simply can not protect itself even marginally (or protect its ways, customs, or genes), let alone survive as a distinct group. It will assimilate the surrounding world or be assimilated into it. In this way, open borders combined with comprehensive anti-discrimination laws, is not merely bad policy, it is implicitly/effectively genocidal.' (Spraguer, 2018)
In the experiment, each stimuli were shown on their own (a single meme at a time) with all three questions appearing on the page at the same time as the stimuli, so respondents could consider all simultaneously, and not have their opinion (and answer) changed by the appearance of other questions. It was for this reason, as well, that the questions remained the same for all stimuli, whether memes or text. This consistency would minimize potential confusion on the part of the respondents, something that could have happened if each type of stimuli had different questions, which could have muddled the results.

3.5 Operationalization, Reliability, & Validity
This research project is very exploratory in nature, so the conceptual scales and measures would greatly benefit from being further developed, tested in a pilot study, and validated across a larger respondent pool. Although issues arose in this project, the design itself could be useful, if further developed. The meme stimuli that were chosen, having been found online and therefore already existing, could also be encountered by respondents in their day-to-day web activities, so in the regards to external validity, the memes chosen could replicate a respondent's experience in a non-experimental context. The timeframe of such a study, however, meant that exposure to offensive content - over a long period of time in non-experimental contexts - had to be quite compressed. The effect studied would not necessarily happen in the same way over a long time where subtle normalization effects might take place as it would over a compressed experimental context, so a more developed expansion of this study could for instance study this effect over multiple experimental sessions spread out over a longer time. The external validity of this study, therefore, would unfortunately be low, although the design itself, if expanded, could yield high validity results.

3.5.1 Meta-Memetic Literacy
The measure of meta-memetic literacy of respondents was particularly difficult to conceptualize. There are no existing scales measuring one's literacy in the language of internet memes. I therefore had to create one for this project, which could potentially measure how knowledgeable respondents were in internet memes, but that would remain short enough as to not inflate the length of the survey. Under the restrictive conditions of this research, some issues arose in the development of such a scale. The first issue encountered was the selection of memes. The four image macros chosen were especially old by today's internet meme standards, but they were nevertheless chosen for a specific reason. More recent memes can be highly versatile in their use, and do not adhere to the rigid top-text/bottom-text format of older image macro memes with established templates, meaning the selected memes, as well, could be relatively recognizable by the general public as 'memes'. Still, though, the response format was such that the correct response seemed - in most cases - too obvious to extract a meaningful measure of meme literacy from the 4-choice question regarding meaning. In most cases, simply knowing the name of the template would tell respondents what the correct answer is. In addition, upon performing reliability testing on these measures in SPSS, the Cronbach's alpha check indicated a low reliability score of .413. As such, this item was abandoned as a measure of meta-memetic literacy. 
	The second issue was that, to measure meta-memetic literacy, it was quickly realized that perceived humour would also not be a good measure, and it was not even tested for reliability. Respondents could, after all, be completely familiar with a particular meme template, but considering the subjectivity of humour, they could also not find it funny at all. This confounding effect was deemed too unclear to be used as basis for analysis. The ease of use item, however, seemed to be a valid indicator of one's literacy in the usage of meme templates. As Vickery (2014) has nevertheless extensively explained, even well-established templates can see some disagreement over their 'correct' usage, in meta-memetic communities, but out of all the survey measures, this one was deemed the most appropriate for measuring literacy within the exploratory context of this research. The scale had a relatively high level of internal consistency, as determined by a Cronbach's alpha of .745.

3.5.2 Perceived Credibility & Harmfulness
Another difficulty encountered during the building of the survey was coming up with questions that could be asked about both memes and text, and which could somewhat accurately measure the extent to which one considered the text paragraph information 'normal', without seeming nonsensical when asked about the memes. The way that was deemed most appropriate under the circumstances was to ask about credibility of information and about harmfulness. A measure of credibility could be best applied to text, while a measure of harmfulness could be best applied to memes, with both being usable for all stimuli. Those measures, as well, build on the literature. 
      Cultural memes, as explained by Dawkins (1976) and Blackmore (1999), tend to spread not because they are true, but because they are catchy. The same could be said for internet memes, with 'catchiness' being reasonably substituted with 'credibility'; if a meme is spreading some kind of information, the more credibly presented this information is, the catchier the meme could seen as being. As explored by the many internet meme researchers whose work was explored above, somewhat offensive memes tend to be perceived as the 'norm' within meta-memetic communities, but those in the know can also understand them to be some form of satire, or 'simply jokes'. As such, this measure can nicely tie in with the meta-memetic literacy measure. Perceived information credibility could relate to the manner in which misinformation and disinformation spreads in memes, as well: Those 'in the know' (meta-memetically literate) could see a meme which expresses some kind of false information, but these users' knowledge of the underlying ideology expressed in memes would allow them to recognize the disinformation trolling, while a non-literate web user might not perceive the 'humour' intended. Asking about credibility, therefore, seemed valuable as one of the two questions asked about each stimuli. Perceived harmfulness is similarly valuable as being somewhat representative of perceived normality, in the context of this study. Those 'in the know' could see an offensive meme, one that conveys extreme rhetorical prejudice, but they would be familiar with the underlying ideology of the community where the meme came from, so they could be more likely to see the 'joke' as equally harmless as most other jokes in memes of that kind. Those not in the know, in contrast, would not have the experience of the general offense and dark humor of these meme communities, and therefore, the information expressed would seem as more extreme or more offensive, and therefore more harmful.
      The overall length of the survey had to be kept quite short to reduce respondent dropout rate, and the overall design was already relatively intricate for such a short experiment, so concessions had to be made. Number of items to measure literacy was reduced, as well as number of stimuli and amount of questions regarding each. As such, it was not possible to have multi-item scales for measuring both perceived credibility and perceived harmfulness. In a longer experimental context, these measures would ideally be expanded. Overall, however, perceived credibility of information and perceived harmfulness were considerate representative enough of the concept of perceived normality, in such a context, and were therefore used.



4. RESULTS

4.1 Tests, Results, & Statistical Significance
Following data cleaning, new variables were computed to be used in statistical analyses. Instead of four different variables indicating to which condition each respondent was assigned, a single new 'condition' variable was created by using the 'recode into same variables' SPSS option, with four values labelled (1) to (4). Across all conditions, perceived credibility and perceived harmfulness scores were summed into single variables, for each meme stimuli, and for the text stimuli. The 'n/a' options values were excluded as to not skew the new variables' values.

H1A: Respondents who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist internet memes were primed to perceive it as more credible, when compared to other groups.
      To test hypothesis 1A, a one-way ANOVA test was conducted to determine if perceived text credibility scores varied between condition groups (1) (shown meme stimuli then text stimuli), (2) (shown text stimuli then meme stimuli), and (4) (shown only text stimuli). Results were not statistically significant (F (2, 94) = 0.99, p = .373). In spite of this, a consideration was made that non-significance could have been due to small sample sizes (n = 36 in group (1); n = 29 in group (2); n = 32 in group (4)), and mean credibility scores were informally considered. There was, however, more of a difference between groups (2) (M = 3.72, SD = 1.13) and (4) (M = 3.37, SD = 1.18) than between groups (1) (M = 3.78, SD = 1.40) and (2) (M = 3.72, SD = 1.13), expected to have the biggest difference in scores due to stimuli being shown in opposite orders. As such, these results were determined to most likely be due to random chance.
	As another way to test h1a, condition groups (2) and (4) were artificially combined, since both were first exposed to the text stimuli first. With only two groups being now compared, an independent samples t-test was selected instead of an ANOVA, comparing perceived text credibility scores between groups (1) (n = 36) and (2+4) (n = 61). Results were, again, not statistically significant, with  p = .090 for Levene's Test for Equality of Variances and t (95) = 0.90,  p = .371 for 2-tailed t-test significance, but an informal examination of mean scores showed a slightly more pronounced difference between groups (1) (M = 3.78, SD = 1.40) and (2+4) (M = 3.54, SD = 1.16), with respondents having been exposed to text first perceiving it as more credible ('1'= high credibility; '5'= low credibility). Nevertheless, in the context of this research, hypothesis 1A was rejected, meaning that respondents who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist internet memes were not primed to perceive it as more credible, when compared to other groups. 

H1B: Respondents who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist internet memes were primed to perceive it as less harmful, when compared to other groups.
      A similar process as for hypothesis 1A was conducted to test hypothesis 1B, instead looking at differences in perceived text harmfulness between groups. A one way ANOVA was conducted and results were not statistically significant (F (2, 85) = 0.78,  p = .462), although informal examination of the scores showed than respondents who were shown meme stimuli first (group (1); M = 7.55, SD = 3.39) perceived the text as less harmful ('1' = harmless; '11' = harmful) than those shown text first (group (2), M = 8.31, SD = 2.31), but the text-only control group's score (group (4); M = 7.41, SD = 2.61) again tells us the differences in score were likely due to random chance.
	Groups (2) and (4) were again artificially combined and an independent samples t-test performed, and while Levene's Test for Equality of Variances showed statistical significance (p = .010), the t-test did not (t (52.811) = -0.43,  p = .670, 2-tailed), with differences in scores being minimal (group (1), M = 7.55, SD = 3.39; group (2), M = 7.84, SD = 2.49) and likely due to chance. Hypothesis 1B, therefore, can also be rejected, meaning that respondents who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist internet memes were not primed to perceive it as less harmful, when compared to other groups.

H2A: Respondents with high internet meme literacy who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist memes were inoculated against perceiving it as more credible, and therefore considered it less credible, when compared to other groups.
To test hypothesis 2, a Univariate Analysis of Variance was performed, looking at interaction effects of two independent variables - condition and meme_literacy - on a single dependent variable. For hypothesis 2A, that dependent variable was perceived credibility of information. The purpose of this test was to see whether different levels of internet meme literacy could influence the influencing effect that would arise differently under each experimental condition, based on the order of presented stimuli. Looking at the output for Tests of Between-Subjects Effects, the p value of the interaction of literacy and condition meant the results did not have statistical significance (F (2, 87) = 0.95, p = .390), although the value was still lower than that of the condition variable (F (2, 87) = 0.62,  p = .541) and the literacy variable (F (1, 87) = 0.004,  p = .952). 
	As an alternative manner to test hypothesis 2A, a median split was performed on the meme_literacy variable, to obtain two groups (high literacy and low literacy), and a Univariate Analysis of Variance was again performed to test for the same interaction effect. The obtained p values indicated - again - no statistical significance. The interaction effect between condition and meme literacy category on text credibility (F (2, 87) = 0.64,  p = .527) strangely increased following the median split, with the new categorical variable (F (1, 87) = 2.06,  p = .286) strangely having a much lower p value than its continuous instance above. The p value of the condition variable remained similar as to previously (F (2, 87) = 0.69,  p = .590). Hypothesis 2A can therefore be rejected, meaning that respondents with high internet meme literacy who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist memes were not inoculated against perceiving it as more credible, and therefore considered it less credible, when compared to other groups.

H2B: Respondents with high internet meme literacy who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist memes were inoculated against perceiving it as less harmful, and therefore considered it more harmful, when compared to other groups.
Testing hypothesis 2B required a similar process as for testing 2A, albeit with a different dependent variable; here perceived harmfulness of information in the text stimuli. Results were - again, not statistically significant when looking at the interaction effects between literacy and condition (F (2, 78) = 0.15,  p = .856) on influencing perceived harmfulness, with literacy (F (2, 78) = 0.001,  p = .980) and condition (F (2, 78) = 0.02,  p = .975) showing similarly non-significant values. Results of the same test following a median split were similarly nont statistically significant (F (2, 78) = 0.03,  p = .969 for the interaction effect. This therefore means that hypothesis 2B can be rejected as well, meaning that respondents with high internet meme literacy who were exposed to ideologically racist text after being exposed to ideologically racist memes were not inoculated against perceiving it as less harmful, and therefore considered it more harmful, when compared to other groups.

4.2 Discussion
Hypothesis 1 testing did not show statistical significance in both of its iterations, each pertaining to one of the two concepts deemed representative of perceived normality in the context of this experiment. It could be that there genuinely would not be any difference between experimental groups who were each shown stimuli in different orders, but based on the literature and study design, a reasonable assumption could be made that there would be statistically significant results under different circumstances. It could be that the final sample was too small for there to be any statistical significance in performed tests: Indeed, the full sample was quite sample to have been representative of a population within this study's exploratory design. Additionally, condition groups each could only be a quarter (approximately, as per the Qualtrics randomizer) of that already small sample. Unfortunately, the study design and its main focus on stimuli order necessitated that there would also be two control groups instead of one, greatly reducing the possibilities for performing tests that would yield significant results. Would there have been a large respondent pool with - still - no statistical significance, another possible explanation comes to mind: It could be that the single piece of text used as part of the stimuli might have been simply 'too extreme' for any normalizing effect to have been measurable on such a compressed experimental scale. If future research reproduces/adapts the present design, an important addition to potentially yield good results would be to expand the number of stimuli greatly. This way, if one text paragraph is too extreme, this would not invalidate the whole study, as there would be more stimuli to measure processing influence on. Alternatively, if only a single textual stimuli would still be used, selection could be made of something more nuanced and subtle in its expressed prejudices.

Hypothesis 2 testing also did not show statistical significance and was thus rejected. In a similar way as for concerning hypothesis 1, the lack of statistical significance could be assumed to not be a genuine lack of effects, as based on theory, but to be the small sample, the compressed nature of the survey, or previously not considered confounding effects. For the case of the second research question and second hypothesis more specifically, as well, it could have been that the conceptualized measure of meta-memetic literacy was not a valid or appropriate one, further illustrating the benefits of repeating this study design on a larger timeframe with more extensively researched and validated scales for measuring internet meme literacy.


5. CONCLUSION

5.1 Implications for Theory
As none of the tests performed in the context of analysing this research's data were statistically significant, it would prove difficult to concretely illustrate and explain implications for the theory. Quite a few unpredicted issues arose when this project entered its analysis phase. Based on the extensiveness of the theoretical background, it was thought that there would at least be some validity in results. One limitation that came to be realized will be explained here, as it relates to one of the research papers used in the theory section. Out of all the existing academic research collected and used in this project, Huntington's (2019) seemed the most similar in her research design to mine.
	Her research yielded results, something that surely is also due to the larger scale of her study, but one problem I had was wanting to be too broad in my exploration, in a way that in retrospect seems the lack the specificity required of quantitative research. I considered - at the time of conceptualizing this research - that a focus on racism, a specific kind of prejudice, would combat the issues caused by a more general focus on ideology, but that wasn't the case. Huntington's (2019) research, in contrast, was extremely specific in its focus on internet memes. Unlike me and my unreasonably broad focus on offensive and racist memes (something that can take a myriad forms in that kind of format), Huntington's (2019) was on political memes and fake news specifically. A similarly fine-tuned focus could have yielded better results, although they may have still not achieved statistical significance due to my small sample.

5.2 Answering Research Questions
To what extent does the exposure to a harmful idea through internet memes influence the later acceptance of that same idea as normal, in different formats?
Within the small scale and exploratory context of this research, offensive internet memes do not enact a normalizing effect on the later perception and processing of offensive text.

To what extent does high internet meme literacy protect viewers from accepting a harmful idea as normal, if initially exposed to it through internet memes?
Within the small scale and exploratory nature of this research, high internet meme literacy was not found to protect viewers from the harmful normalizing effect explored in the previous research question. 

5.3 Limitations
The biggest limitations of this project were two-fold: The highly exploratory nature of the research, combined with the limited scope afforded by its student-research context, meant that whatever results were found could not be applicable to any sort of wider population. The small size of the sample, and the even smaller experimental groups, was a major difficulty in the obtaining of valid results. The utility of this project, ultimately, was to conceptualize a study design that future research could expand and build upon. In previous sections, limitations of this research were mentioned and explained as they became topical, but the one that seems to have been the biggest is the compression of such a complex cultural influence as ideological normalization/radicalization through memes into such a small, 10-minute long experimental survey. Qualitative research on radicalization through the internet, of which offensive internet memes only played a small part, would not be able to 'prevent' the damage done, but with the benefit of hindsight, it could at least consider and study a multitude of influences that radicalized individuals may have been subjected to.
	Here, the research intention ultimately proved to be too broad, attempting to reducing what would be months or years of exposure to mis/disinformation and harmful ideologies, online, of which offensive memes would only play a small part. As such, although the usage as stimuli of memes found 'in the wild' and the experimental survey taking place online could have to a certain extent replicated the conditions of encountering these stimuli in day to day internet activity, the short allotted length meant it was not possible to have filler items of the non-offensive kind, something that may have helped in masking the true purpose of the study. Although respondents wouldn't have necessarily guessed the true purpose to a full extent, the cover story given may have still been too close to the real research goal to act as enough of a cover story. Knowing they were being tested for perception of offensive memes could have influenced respondents to be more mindful and considerate of their answers in a manner that could have also invalidated results, had there been statistical significance. By knowing the survey dealt with prejudice, respondents could have subconsciously prepared to answer questions on prejudice, not necessarily by specifically guessing the testing was about racism, but statistically significant results may have still been negatively affected by the confounding effect of the cover story and the true purpose being so close to one another.

5.4 Suggestions for Future Research
There are a few things that could be done prior to potentially replicating this project, the most important one being the development and validation of a proper scale of measurement of meta-memetic literacy. This would require multiple stages of pilot testing. Potentially, there would need to be a few different scales measuring literacy in certain categories or genres of memes, since they can be so intricate in their language. With such a scale development done, there could also be further research into what type of meme literacy can have an effect over what other type of content. The scale items used here were, as mentioned, quite old by the standards of internet memes, but current meme culture can be so complex to almost require the development of multiple literacy scales for different types of memes, or different communities out of which they emerge. Such a process might need to start at a qualitative level, with interview or focus groups with respondents who self-identify as 'knowing a lot' about internet memes. Over time, comparaisons and links could be drawn between responses, eventually transitioning development to a quantitative design for testing and validation.
      Future studies with my design would benefit a lot from having a complete (even if shortened) scales to measure ideological positioning, both on horizontal left-right and vertical authoritarian-libertarian axes. This way, a respondent's ideological positioning would be more accurately devised, from existing validated scales that would remove the negative effects that could arise out of a fully self-identification placements along a single axis. As was already explained, the stimuli could benefit from being devised specifically for this research, although that process would need to be a collaborative one to minimize the risk of researcher subconsciously implementing their own internalized biases. This way, stimuli could be organized along different intensities of the offensive information expressed, and different levels of subtlety, to see how these different levels could potentially prime/inoculate respondents to consider later stimuli differently.
      The most important suggestion that could be given as to replicate this research in the future, ultimately, would be to greatly expend the design. Individuals who have been radicalized through memes have not done so through a single 10-minute survey. As such, a more ideal version of this research would take place over multiple months, with enough time between experimental sessions for respondents to (possibly) internalize information they've been given. This method would give more nuanced results than the compressed design of this research would have, had results been statistically significant. Concerning this, as well, an important suggestion for future research would be to have many more respondents than I did, enough as to obtain a sample that would be more representative of the studied population.

   REFERENCES

      Albrecht, S., Fielitz, M. & Thurston, N. (2019). Introduction. In M. Fielitz & N. Thurston (Eds) (2019). Post-digital cultures of the far right: Online actions and offline consequences in Europe and the US, pp. 7-22. Bielefeld, Germany: Transcript Verlag.
      Alvermann, D. E. (2017). Social media texts and critical inquiry in a post-factual era. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 61(3), 335-338.
      Banas, J. A. & Rains, S. A. (2010). A meta-analysis of research on inoculation theory. Communication Monographs, 77(3), 281-311.
      Bernstein, M. S., Monroy-Hernández, A., Harry, D., André, P., Panovich, K. & Vargas, G. (2011). 4chan and /b/: An analysis of anonymity and ephemerality in a large online community. Proceedings of the Fifth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 50-57.
      Babbie, E. (2014). The basics of social research, 6th edition. Boston, MA: Wadsworth CENGAGE Learning.
      Benkler, Y., Faris, R. & Roberts, H. (2018). The propaganda pipeline: Hacking the core from the periphery. In Network propaganda: Manipulation, disinformation, and radicalization in American politics, pp. 225-233. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
      Bertazolli, A. (2019). Russian resistance and propaganda through memes in the 2010s. In Internet memes and society: Social, cultural, and political contexts, pp. 54-184. New York, USA / London, UK: Routledge.
      Blackmore, S. (1999). The meme machine. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
      Brideau, K. & Berret, C. (2014). A brief introduction to Impact: 'The meme font'. Journal of Visual Culture, 13(3), 307-313.
      Christensen, K., Spahiu, A., Wilson, B. & Duval, R. D. (2015). Mobilizing on the fringe: Domestic extremists and antisocial networking. In P. A. Simpson & H. Druxes (Eds) (2015). Digital media strategies of the far-right in Europe and the United States, pp. 55-83. Lanham, MD, USA: Lexington Books. 
      Coleman, G. (2014). Hacker, hoaxer, whistleblower, spy. The many faces of Anonymous. New York, USA / London, UK: Verso.
      Conte, R. (2001). Memes through (social) minds. In R. Aunger (Ed.). Darwinizing culture: The status of memetics as a social science, pp. 83-120. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
      Dawkins, R. (1976, 2006). Memes: The new replicators. In R. Dawkins, The selfish gene, 3rd Ed. pp. 189-201. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
      Dawkins, R. (1999). Foreword. In S. Blackmore (1999). The meme machine, pp. vii-xvii. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Dillman Carpentier, F. R., Roskos-Ewoldsen, D. R. & Roskos-Ewoldsen, B. B. (2008). A test of the network models of political priming. Media Psychology, 11(2), 186-206.
      Douglas, N. (2014). It's supposed to look like shit: The internet ugly aesthetic. Journal of Visual Culture, 13(3), 314-339.
      Drakett, J., Rickett, B., Day, K. & Milnes, K. (2018). Old jokes, new media - Online sexism and constructions of gender in Internet memes. Feminism & Psychology, 28(1), 109-127.
      Gal, N., Shifman, L. & Kampf, Z. (2016). "It Gets Better": Internet memes and the construction of collective identity. new media & society, 18(8), 1698-1714.
      Gerend, M. A. & Sias, T. (2009). Message framing and color priming: How subtle threat cues affect persuasion. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 999-1002.
      Geuens, M. & De Pelsmacker, P. (2017). Planning and conducting experimental advertising research and questionnaire design. Journal of Advertising, 46(1), 83-100.
      Ging, D. (2019). Alphas, betas, and incels: Theorizing the masculinities of the manosphere. Men and Masculinities, 22(4), 638-657. 
      Hartzell, S. L. (2018). Alt-white: Conceptualizing the "Alt-Right" as a rhetorical bridge between white nationalism and mainstream public discourse. Journal of Contemporary Rhetoric, 8(1/2), 6-25.
      Huntington, H. E. (2019). Partisan cues and internet memes: Early evidence for motivated skepticism in audience message processing of spreadable political media. Atlantic Journal of Communication, 1-15. 
      Johnson, A., del Rio, E. & Kemmitt, A. (2010). Missing the joke: A reception analysis of satirical texts. Communication, Culture & Critique, 3, 396-415.
      Kata, A. (2012). Anti-vaccine activists, Web 2.0, and the postmodern paradigm - An overview of tactics and tropes used online by the anti-vaccination movement. Vaccine, 30, 3778-3789. 
      Knobel, M. (2006). Memes and affinity spaces: Some implications for policy and digital divides in education. E-Learning, 3(3), 411-427.
      Knobel, M. & Lankshear, C. (2007). Online memes, affinities, and cultural production. In M. Knobel & C. Lankshear (Eds.) (2007). A new literacies sampler, pp. 199-228. New York, USA: Peter Lang Publishing.
      Kroh, M. (2007). Measuring left-right political orientation: The choice of response format. Public Opinion Quarterly, 71(2), 204-220.
      Lievrouw, L. A. (2011). Chapter 3: Monkeywrenching the media machine - Culture jamming. In Alternative and activist new media, pp. 72-97. Malden, MA, USA: Polity Press.
      Manganelli Rattazzi, A. M., Bobbio, A. & Canova, L. (2007). A short version of the Right-Wing Authoritarianism (RWA) scale. Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 1223-1234.
      Massanari, A. (2017). #Gamergate and The Fappening: How Reddit's algorithm, governance, and culture support toxic technocultures. new media & society, 19(3), 329-346.
      Merrin, W. (2019). Chapter 13: President troll: Trump, 4chan and memetic warfare. In C. Happer, A. Hoskins & W. Merrin (Eds.) (2019). Trump's media war, pp. 201-226. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
      Milner, R. M. (2013). Hacking the social: Internet memes, identity antagonism, and the logic of lulz. The Fibreculture Journal, 22, 62-92.
      Moreno-Almeida, C. (2020). Memes as snapshots of participation: The roles of digital amateur activists in authoritarian regimes. new media & society, 00(0), 1-22.
      Neuman, W. L. (2014). Social research methods: Qualitative and quantitative approaches, 7th edition. Harlow, UK: Pearson Education Limited.
      Rintel, S. (2013). Crisis memes: The importance of templatability to internet culture and freedom of expression. Australasian Journal of Popular Culture, 2(2), 253-271.
      Roozenbeek, J., van der Linden, S. & Nygren, T. (2020). Prebunking interventions based on "inoculation" theory can reduce susceptibility to misinformation across cultures. The Harvard Kennedy School Misinformation Review, 1(2), 1-23.
      Shifman, L. (2014). Memes in digital culture. Cambridge, MA, USA: The MIT Press.
      Smith, C. A. (2019). Weaponized iconoclasm in Internet memes featuring the expression 'Fake News'. Discourse & Communication, 13(3), 303-319.
      Spraguer, E. (2018, April 28th). Anti-racism is immoral. AltRight.com. Retrieved from https://altright.com/2018/04/28/anti-racism-is-immoral/ 
      Srull, T. K. & Wyer, R. S. (1979). The role of category accessibility in the interpretation of information about persons: Some determinants and implications. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 1660-1672.
      Vickery, J. R. (2014). The curious case of Confession Bear: The reappropriation of online macro-image memes. Information, Communication & Society, 17(3), 301-325.
      Wiggins, B. E. & Bowers, G. B. (2015). Memes as genre: A structurational analysis of the memescape. New media and society, 17(11), 1886-1906.
      Williams, A., Oliver, C., Aumer, K. & Meyers, C. (2016). Racial microaggressions and perceptions of Internet memes. Computers in Human Behavior, 63, 424-432.



	APPENDIX A - Qualtrics survey


Start of Block: 1) Info, consent

info1 Welcome! 
   
Thank you for taking the time to fill out this survey. Completing it should take you no more than 10 minutes.
 
 The purpose of my research is to examine how people from different backgrounds perceive and interpret potentially offensive, 'edgy' internet memes.
 
 Please be aware that you may be shown content of a shocking nature.   
   
This survey does not contain shocking imagery, but the textual content may be considered offensive.


Page Breakconsent CONSENT REQUEST FOR PARTICIPATION IN RESEARCH
  For questions about the study, contact:  Nicolas Koutonias, 430273nk@student.eur.nl
  Description:  I am a student from the Erasmus University Rotterdam, in The Netherlands, conducting research for my Master's Degree thesis.
  The purpose of my study is to examine how people from different backgrounds perceive and interpret potentially offensive and 'politically incorrect' internet meme images. As part of the research, you may be exposed to content that could offend and shock you. This content could be of a racist, sexist, homophobic, or transphobic nature. There is, therefore, a risk of some psychological distress.
  By agreeing to participate in this study, you consent to being shown such content.
  Time involvement:  Your participation in this study will take approximately 10 minutes. You may interrupt your participation at any time.
  Payments:  There will be no monetary compensation for your participation.
  Participants' rights:  If you have decided to participate in this project, please understand your participation is voluntary and you have the right to withdraw your consent by discontinuing participation at any time without penalty.The answers you provide will be used in analysis for the purpose of the research, but no private information of any kind will be collected.Your individual privacy will be preserved in all published and written data resulting from this study.
  Signing the consent form:  By clicking 'Yes, I consent' below, you agree to the terms of participation of this survey, and agree that your anonymous answers will be recorded and used in my research.
  You must be at least 18 years old to participate.
o Yes, I consent (Continue survey)  (1) 
o No, I do not consent (Quit survey)  (2) 

Skip To: End of Survey If CONSENT REQUEST FOR PARTICIPATION IN RESEARCH For questions about the study, contact: Nicolas Kou... = No, I do not consent (Quit survey)
End of Block: 1) Info, consent

Start of Block: 2) Demographics

info2 In the following section, you will be asked a few short questions about your background and identity.


Page Break
age How old are you? Please enter the year of your birth.
    ________________________________________________________________

edu Please indicate your level of schooling/education.
o Some secondary education (high school)  (1) 
o Completed secondary education  (2) 
o Trade/technical/vocational training  (3) 
o Some undergraduate education (college/university)  (4) 
o Completed undergraduate education (Bachelor's degree)  (5) 
o Some postgraduate education  (6) 
o Completed postgraduate education (Master's degree and beyond)  (7) 
o Other (Please specify)  (8) ________________________________________________


Page Break
residence In which country do you currently reside?
▼ Afghanistan (1) ... Zimbabwe (196)



home [Optional] Is there a country other than your country of residence that you would consider your home?
▼ Afghanistan (1) ... Zimbabwe (196)


Page Break
gender To which gender identity do you most identify?
o Male  (1) 
o Female  (2) 
o Non-Binary  (3) 
o Prefer not to answer  (4) 
o Other (Please specify)  (5) ________________________________________________



race To which racial or ethnic identity do you most identify?
o Arab  (1) 
o Asian  (2) 
o Black  (3) 
o Hispanic  (4) 
o Indian  (5) 
o Pacific Islander  (6) 
o White  (7) 
o Prefer not to answer  (8) 
o Other (Please specify)  (9) ________________________________________________

End of Block: 2) Demographics

Start of Block: 3) Ideology
info3a In the following section, you will be asked a few short questions about your beliefs. There are no right or wrong answers.


Page Break
left-right In politics, people sometimes talk of 'left' and 'right'. Where would you place yourself on a scale from 1 to 11 where 1 means extreme left and 11 means extreme right?
Center
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break
info3b Read the following statements. For each of them, please indicate your level of agreement/disagreement.



ideo1 'The fact on crime, sexual immorality and the recent public disorders all show that we have to crack down harder on deviant groups and troublemakers, if we are going to save our moral standards and preserve law and order.'
o Strongly agree  (1) 
o Agree  (2) 
o Somewhat agree  (3) 
o Neither agree nor disagree  (4) 
o Somewhat disagree  (5) 
o Disagree  (6) 
o Strongly disagree  (7) 



ideo2 'Homosexuals and feminists should be praised for being brave enough to defy "traditional family values."'
o Strongly agree  (1) 
o Agree  (2) 
o Somewhat agree  (3) 
o Neither agree nor disagree  (4) 
o Somewhat disagree  (5) 
o Disagree  (6) 
o Strongly disagree  (7) 

Page Breakideo3 'Everyone should have their own lifestyle, religious beliefs, and sexual preferences, even if it makes them different from everyone else.'
o Strongly agree  (1) 
o Agree  (2) 
o Somewhat agree  (3) 
o Neither agree nor disagree  (4) 
o Somewhat disagree  (5) 
o Disagree  (6) 
o Strongly disagree  (7) 



ideo4 'It is good that nowadays young people have greater freedom "to make their own rules" and to protest against things they don't like.'
o Strongly agree  (1) 
o Agree  (2) 
o Somewhat agree  (3) 
o Neither agree nor disagree  (4) 
o Somewhat disagree  (5) 
o Disagree  (6) 
o Strongly disagree  (7) 



ideo5 'We should treat protestors and radicals with open arms and open minds, since new ideas are the lifeblood of progressive change'
o Strongly agree  (1) 
o Agree  (2) 
o Somewhat agree  (3) 
o Neither agree nor disagree  (4) 
o Somewhat disagree  (5) 
o Disagree  (6) 
o Strongly disagree  (7) 

End of Block: 3) Ideology

Start of Block: 4) Literacy

info4 In the following section, you will be shown a few text-less internet meme images (or meme templates). For each of them, please answer the questions below.


If you do not recognize or know the meme, please select the 'n/a' option.


Page Breakmeme1




m1q1 In your opinion, which emotion/attitude/state could be best conveyed when using this template?
o Confession  (1) 
o Shame  (2) 
o Toxic beliefs  (3) 
o Annoyance  (4) 



m1q2 How likely are you to find humor in a meme made using this template?
o Extremely likely  (1) 
o Somewhat likely  (2) 
o Neither likely nor unlikely  (3) 
o Somewhat unlikely  (4) 
o Extremely unlikely  (5) 
o n/a  (6) 



m1q3 How easy/difficult would you find using this meme the 'correct' way?
o Extremely easy  (1) 
o Somewhat easy  (2) 
o Neither easy nor difficult  (3) 
o Somewhat difficult  (4) 
o Extremely difficult  (5) 
o n/a  (6) 


Page Break


meme2




m2q1 In your opinion, which emotion/attitude/state could be best conveyed when using this template?
o Social awkwardness  (1) 
o Willful ignorance  (2) 
o Social isolation  (3) 
o Social confidence  (4) 



m2q2 How likely are you to find humor in a meme made using this template?
o Extremely likely  (1) 
o Somewhat likely  (2) 
o Neither likely nor unlikely  (3) 
o Somewhat unlikely  (4) 
o Extremely unlikely  (5) 
o n/a  (6) 



m2q3 How easy/difficult would you find using this meme the 'correct' way?
o Extremely easy  (1) 
o Somewhat easy  (2) 
o Neither easy nor difficult  (3) 
o Somewhat difficult  (4) 
o Extremely difficult  (5) 
o n/a  (6) 


Page Break


meme3




m3q1 In your opinion, which emotion/attitude/state could be best conveyed when using this template?
o Excessive attachment  (1) 
o Social manipulation  (2) 
o Emotional manipulation  (3) 
o Emotional abuse  (4) 



m3q2 How likely are you to find humor in a meme made using this template?
o Extremely likely  (1) 
o Somewhat likely  (2) 
o Neither likely nor unlikely  (3) 
o Somewhat unlikely  (4) 
o Extremely unlikely  (5) 
o n/a  (6) 



m3q3 How easy/difficult would you find using this meme the 'correct' way?
o Extremely easy  (1) 
o Somewhat easy  (2) 
o Neither easy nor difficult  (3) 
o Somewhat difficult  (4) 
o Extremely difficult  (5) 
o n/a  (6) 


Page Break


meme4




m4q1 In your opinion, which emotion/attitude/state could be best conveyed when using this template?
o Uncleanliness  (1) 
o Laziness  (2) 
o Sexual frustration  (3) 
o Promiscuity  (4) 



m4q2 How likely are you to find humor in a meme made using this template?
o Extremely likely  (1) 
o Somewhat likely  (2) 
o Neither likely nor unlikely  (3) 
o Somewhat unlikely  (4) 
o Extremely unlikely  (5) 
o n/a  (6) 



m4q3 How easy/difficult would you find using this meme the 'correct' way?
o Extremely easy  (1) 
o Somewhat easy  (2) 
o Neither easy nor difficult  (3) 
o Somewhat difficult  (4) 
o Extremely difficult  (5) 
o n/a  (6) 

End of Block: 4) Literacy

Start of Block: 5A) Condition1

info5a In the following section, you will be shown a series of internet memes and a short text paragraph. Please read and consider each, then answer the questions below.


Page Break


cnd1m1




cnd1m1q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd1m1q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd1m2




cnd1m2q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd1m2q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd1m3




cnd1m3q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd1m3q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd1m4




cnd1m4q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd1m4q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd1m5




cnd1m5q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd1m5q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd1t 'One of the chief forms of racial discrimination, for example, is exclusion. However, a total lack of exclusion/separation is an invitation to miscegenation, to cultural disintegration via borrowing and mixing, to the rewriting and rereading of one's history, to the complete loss of identity, etc.  Without any barriers to entry into a group, the group simply cannot protect itself even marginally (or protect its ways, customs, or genes), let alone survive as a distinct group. It will assimilate the surrounding world or be assimilated into it. In this way, open borders combined with comprehensive anti-discrimination laws, is not simply bad policy, it is implicitly/effectively genocidal.'



cnd1tq1 The above text presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this text)  (6) 



cnd1tq2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above text could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()

End of Block: 5A) Condition1

Start of Block: 5B) Condition2

info5b In the following section, you will be shown a short text paragraph and a series of internet memes. Please read and consider each, then answer the questions below.


Page Break


cnd2t 'One of the chief forms of racial discrimination, for example, is exclusion. However, a total lack of exclusion/separation is an invitation to miscegenation, to cultural disintegration via borrowing and mixing, to the rewriting and rereading of one's history, to the complete loss of identity, etc.  Without any barriers to entry into a group, the group simply cannot protect itself even marginally (or protect its ways, customs, or genes), let alone survive as a distinct group. It will assimilate the surrounding world or be assimilated into it. In this way, open borders combined with comprehensive anti-discrimination laws, is not simply bad policy, it is implicitly/effectively genocidal.'



cnd2tq1 The above text presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this text)  (6) 



cnd2tq2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above text could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd2m1




cnd2m1q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd2m1q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd2m2




cnd2m2q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd2m2q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd2m3




cnd2m3q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd2m3q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd2m4




cnd2m4q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd2m4q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd2m5




cnd2m5q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd2m5q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()

End of Block: 5B) Condition2

Start of Block: 5C) Condition3

info5c In the following section, you will be shown a series of internet memes. Please read and consider each, then answer the questions below.


Page Break


cnd3m1




cnd3m1q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd3m1q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd3m2




cnd3m2q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd3m2q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd3m3




cnd3m3q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd3m3q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd3m4




cnd3m4q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd3m4q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()


Page Break


cnd3m5




cnd3m5q1 The above meme presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this meme)  (6) 



cnd3m5q2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above meme could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()

End of Block: 5C) Condition3

Start of Block: 5D) Condition4

info5d In the following section, you will be shown a short text paragraph. Please read and consider it, then answer the questions below.


Page Break


cnd4t 'One of the chief forms of racial discrimination, for example, is exclusion. However, a total lack of exclusion/separation is an invitation to miscegenation, to cultural disintegration via borrowing and mixing, to the rewriting and rereading of one's history, to the complete loss of identity, etc.  Without any barriers to entry into a group, the group simply cannot protect itself even marginally (or protect its ways, customs, or genes), let alone survive as a distinct group. It will assimilate the surrounding world or be assimilated into it. In this way, open borders combined with comprehensive anti-discrimination laws, is not simply bad policy, it is implicitly/effectively genocidal.'



cnd4tq1 The above text presents some kind of information. How credible do you think this information is?
o Extremely credible  (1) 
o Somewhat credible  (2) 
o Neutral  (3) 
o Somewhat not credible  (4) 
o Extremely not credible  (5) 
o n/a (I do not understand this text)  (6) 



cnd4tq2 On a scale of 1 to 11, where 1 means harmless and 11 means harmful, where do you think the above text could best be placed?
Neutral
1234567891011
1 ()

End of Block: 5D) Condition4

Start of Block: 7) Perceived intent

info7 In the last section of this survey, you will be shown some offensive memes. Consider each, then please indicate what you think the intent behind its creation was.


Page Break


intm1a




intm1und Did you understand what information this meme is meant to convey?
o Yes  (1) 
o No  (2) 


Display This Question:
    If Did you understand what information this meme is meant to convey? = No

info7b This meme is racist and transphobic. 
It implies that the Nazis were 'correct' (and therefore the 'good guys') in their persecution of people of non-white ethnic backgrounds or with a trangender personal identity.



intm1b




intm1q In your opinion, what was the intent behind the creation of this meme?
o Satire  (1) 
o Offense for the sake of comedy  (2) 
o Offense for the sake of hurting others  (3) 
o Expression of genuine personal beliefs  (4) 
o Not sure  (5) 


Page Break


intm2a




intm2und Did you understand what information this meme is meant to convey?
o Yes  (1) 
o No  (2) 


Display This Question:
    If Did you understand what information this meme is meant to convey? = No

info7c This meme is racist.
It implies that 'white genocide' (a conspiracy theory which states that 'race-mixing' will lead to a disappearance of the 'white race') is orchestrated by the Jewish people (who are, based on another conspiracy theory, secretively controlling the world).



intm2b




intm2q In your opinion, what was the intent behind the creation of this meme?
o Satire  (1) 
o Offense for the sake of comedy  (2) 
o Offense for the sake of hurting others  (3) 
o Expression of genuine personal beliefs  (4) 
o Not sure  (5) 


Page Break


intm3a




intm3und Did you understand what information this meme is meant to convey?
o Yes  (1) 
o No  (2) 


Display This Question:
    If Did you understand what information this meme is meant to convey? = No

info7d This meme is racist.
It implies that Black people cannot read, and that only White people can achieve financial success. 



intm3b




intm3q In your opinion, what was the intent behind the creation of this meme?
o Satire  (1) 
o Offense for the sake of comedy  (2) 
o Offense for the sake of hurting others  (3) 
o Expression of genuine personal beliefs  (4) 
o Not sure  (5) 

End of Block: 7) Perceived intent

Start of Block: 8) Debriefing

purposeyn You have now reached the end of the survey. Do you think you know what this research was actually about?
o Yes  (1) 
o No  (2) 


Display This Question:
    If You have now reached the end of the survey. Do you think you know what this research was actually... = Yes

purpose Please write a few words about what you think the research purpose of this survey was (max. 280 characters).
    ________________________________________________________________


Page Break


info8a




info8b Thank you for your participation in my research!


The actual purpose of this survey was not to examine how people from different backgrounds perceive and interpret offensive and 'edgy' internet memes, but instead to experiment if perceptions could be slightly altered if an idea is first introduced in an offensive meme, then shown again in a different format. If you did not see such memes prior to being asked about intent, you were part of the control group.




In order to dispel negative information you may have unwittingly internalized after participating in this experiment, feel free to visit the websites of the following NGOs, which work to combat widespread harmful perceptions:


European Network Against Racism:
enar-eu.org 


Transgender Europe:
tgeu.org 




If you would like to share this survey with someone, please make sure you do not accidentally reveal to them the true research purpose.


Thank you!

End of Block: 8) Debriefing




Travel Influencers vs. Travel Agencies:
The Impact of Instagram Travel Content on Young Adults' Perceived Source Credibility, Travel Planning Behaviors and Destination Choices.

A quantitative research into the differences between sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers, non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers and non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel agencies.



	





Student Name:	Lysanne Charlotte Meijer
Student Number:	472392

Supervisor: 		Dr. Joao Ferreira Goncalves


Master Media Studies - Media & Creative Industries
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication
Erasmus University Rotterdam


Master's Thesis 
June 2021

	 
        Word count:
Travel Influencers vs. Travel Agencies:
The Impact of Instagram Travel Content on Young Adults' Perceived Source Credibility, Travel Planning Behaviors and Destination Choices.
 
ABSTRACT

The general aim of this study was to increase one's understanding of how Instagram travel content influences young adults' perceived source credibility, travel planning behaviors and destination choices. By conducting an online between-subjects experimental survey with four conditions, the researcher aspired to examine the differences between the following types of Instagram content: (1) sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers, (2) non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers, (3) non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel agencies, and (4) anonymous Instagram travel content. Based on previous research, it was hypothesized that young adults between the age of 18 and 24 perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as more credible than Instagram content made by travel agencies. Besides, young adults from this age group were expected to be more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies in their travel planning behaviors and destination choices. While the former relationship was assumed to be moderated by young adults' ability to recognize advertisements, the latter relationship was assumed to be mediated by young adults' perceived source credibility. Multiple statistical analyses in IBM SPSS, including Hayes' PROCESS Macro, were conducted to test the considered relationships. According to the results of the statistical analyses, the researcher could conclude that actually the opposite is true. It appeared that young adults between the age of 18 and 24 perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as less credible than Instagram content made by travel agencies. However, this is only the case when the former type of content contains sponsored elements (=moderation effect). Furthermore, it turned out that young adults do not prefer one type of content over another when it comes to using it in their travel planning behaviors and destination choices. This is because perceived source credibility only mediates young adults' decisions to use Instagram content made by travel agencies in their travel planning behaviors. Still, the results of this study contribute to the larger theoretical framework of understanding the implications of Instagram travel content. While young adults can use the findings of this research to learn more about the persuasive elements of travel (influencer) marketing, travel influencers and travel agencies can use the findings of this research to learn more about their target audiences' preferences. To further explore advertising skepticism among young adults, future researchers are advised to also investigate the impact of partiality disclosure. 

KEYWORDS: Instagram, Travel Content, Travel Influencers, Travel Agencies, Travel Planning Behaviors, Destination Choices, Young Adults
Preface 

The copyright of this Master's Thesis rests with the author Lysanne Meijer. This means that the author is responsible for its contents. The Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication cannot be held liable for the content of this thesis.


Acknowledgements

      First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude towards my Master's Thesis supervisor dr. João Ferreira Conçalves. Thank you for your support, guidance and valuable feedback throughout the entire process of this major project. I highly appreciate your patience and your drive of the last couple of months to turn me into an professional quantitative researcher. Because of you, writing this thesis was a fun and challenging experience and I am grateful to you for that. 
      Secondly, I would like to thank my friends and family for constantly motivating me to proceed with my Master's Thesis. Not only were you there for me during the ups, but also during the downs of this rollercoaster. I am very proud of the result and I hope you are too!
      Finally, a big thank you goes to everyone who took the time to fill in and share the experimental survey of this study. Without your answers, this thesis wouldn't be as valuable as it is now. I am always open to talk with you about the results or to discuss the future of (travel) influencer marketing. Besides, if you want me to fill in or share one of your quantitative surveys, I am happy to do so.  

Enjoy reading, 

Lysanne Meijer


Table of contents

Abstract & Keywords
Preface
Acknowledgements 
1. Introduction	1
2.1. Introduction of Topic	1
2.2. Academic & Societal Relevance	2
2. Literature Review	3
2.1. Travel and Tourism Industry	3
2.1.1. Travel and Tourism Industry defined	3
2.2. Travel Planning Behaviors & Destination Choices	4
2.2.1. Decision-Making in Tourism	4
2.2.2. Problem Recognition & Information Search	5
2.2.3. Evaluation of Alternatives & Purchase Decisions	6
2.2.4. Post purchase behaviors	7
2.3. Influencer Marketing in Tourism	7
2.3.1. Commercial use of travel influencers	7
2.3.2. Authenticity & Credibility	9
2.3.3. Travel influencers' disclosure dilemma	11
2.4. Hypotheses & Proposed Conceptual Model	12
3. Methodology	15
3.1. Research Method	15
3.2. Research Design	15
3.2.1. Online Experimental Survey	15
3.2.2. Experimental Stimuli	16
3.2.3. Procedure	21
3.3. Sampling	22
3.3.1. Sampling Technique	22
3.3.2. Total Sample Description	22
3.3.3. Sample Description per Condition	23
3.4. Operationalization	26
3.4.1. Independent Variable Type of Content	26
3.4.2. Dependent Variable Travel Planning Behavior	26
3.4.3. Dependent Variable Destination Choices	27
3.4.4. Mediating Variable Source Credibility	27
3.4.5. Moderating Variable Advertisement Recognition	28
3.4.6. Control Variables	29
3.4.7. Explorative Factor Analyses	30
3.5. Validity & Reliability	33
3.5.1. Pre-testing	33
3.5.2. Manipulation Checks	34
3.6. Data Analysis	34
4. Results	36
4.1. The Influence of Type of Content	36
4.1.1. The Relationship between Type of Content and Source Credibility	36
4.1.2. The Relationship between Type of Content, Travel Planning Behavior & Destination Choices	38
4.2. The Mediating Effect of Source Credibility	39
4.2.1. The Relationship between Type of Content, Source Credibility & Travel Planning Behaviors	39
4.2.2. The Relationship between Type of Content, Source Credibility & Destination Choices	41
4.3. The Moderating Effect of Advertisement Recognition	43
4.4. The Influence of the Control Variables	45
4.5. Hypotheses & Results	46
5. Conclusion & Discussion	48
5.1. Discussion	48
5.1.1. Summary of Results	48
5.1.2. Skepticism as Possible Explanation	51
5.2. Conclusion	53
5.2.1. Overall Conclusion	53
5.2.2. Implications	54
5.2.3. Limitations & Future Research	55
References	57
Appendix A: Experiment Guide	65
Appendix B: Experimental Survey Flow	82


List of figures

Figure 2. 1	5
Figure 2. 2	6
Figure 2. 3	9
Figure 2. 4	14

Figure 3. 1	15
Figure 3. 2	16
Figure 3. 3	17
Figure 3. 4	18
Figure 3. 5	18
Figure 3. 6	19

Figure 4. 1	39
Figure 4. 2	41


List of Tables

Table 2. 1:	11

Table 3. 1	14
Table 3. 2	23
Table 3. 3	23
Table 3. 4	24
Table 3. 5	27
Table 3. 6	29
Table 3. 7	30

Table 4. 1	44

Table 5. 1	47
Table 5. 2	47
Table 5. 3	47
Table 5. 4	48
Table 5. 5	48

Table C. 1	79

74 1. Introduction

74.1 2.1. Introduction of Topic
      The development of Web 2.0 drastically changed the travel and tourism industry (Cox et al., 2009). In today's society, individuals no longer depend on traditional communication channels such as television, radio and news outlets to obtain information about potential travel destinations. Instead, through Social Networking Sites (SNS) like Instagram and YouTube, individuals collect travel information in more subtle and advanced ways. As stated by Xiang & Gretzel (2010), however, SNS' powerful impact extends beyond simply recommending individuals where to travel to. Nowadays, future travellers also turn to the photo- and video-sharing platforms for information on how to travel and what to experience when they do. 
      In the age of social media, online travel content plays an increasingly important role in influencing young adults' travel intentions and planning behaviors (Swarbrooke & Horner, 2007). Especially online travel posts created by social media influencers serve as travel guides and provide individuals with continuous travel inspiration. In general, the development of Web 2.0 is what made this change in information acquisition possible. According to Reactive (2007), Web 2.0 refers to 'the second generation of web-based services that have gained massive popularity by letting people collaborate and share information online in previously unavailable ways' (p.3). In today's society, third-party endorses called social media influencers upload travel content and imagery to the web for others to see and respond to. In general, this evolution has a huge impact on the travel and tourism industry and creates compelling fields of study. 
	 Previous studies in the field of tourism have already investigated online travel content from various perspectives (e.g. Shuqair & Cragg, 2017). This includes the examination of consumer motivations to interact with online travel content (e.g. Barbe et al., 2020) and the analysis of travel content made by social media influencers (e.g. Magno & Cassia, 2018; Xu & Pratt, 2018). According to multiple scholars (e.g. Cox et al., 2009), especially online travel content made by social media influencers is effective electronic Word of Mouth (eWoM). Because social media influencers have become extremely popular in determining (future) travel trends, more and more holiday destinations and travel agencies aim to cooperate with them (Gretzel, 2018). In general, this development results in the emergence of extended influencer marketing and a big increase of (sponsored) user-generated travel content.   
      After carefully studying the previous findings, interesting questions arise. To what extent, for example, do young adults perceive travel content made by social media influencers as more credible and useful than travel content made by travel agencies? Besides, does this perception change when they recognize that the content made by social media influencers is sponsored? In reaction to these questions, and in order to learn more about the phenomenon, this particular research aims to conduct an online between-subjects experimental survey with four conditions (1= sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers, 2= non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers, and 3= non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel agencies) and one control group (anonymous Instagram travel content). Its main goal is to examine the differences between the influence of (sponsored) Instagram content made by travel influencers and the influence of Instagram content made by travel agencies. The research question of this investigation is as follows: 
      
      To what extent does travel content on Instagram (made by travel influencers vs. travel agencies) influence young adults' perceived source credibility, travel planning behaviors and destination choices?
      
74.2 2.2. Academic & Societal Relevance
      In the past, the alternatives travelers evaluated were mostly suggested by organic sources such as family members, friends or printed brochures. Nowadays, however, travelers also get alternatives suggested by online sources with whom they have no personal relationships. This development is made possible by Web 2.0 and has a huge impact on the travel and tourism industry. Because this development changes the way in which travelers make travel decisions, and influences the way in which travel agencies such as Booking.com and TripAdvisor operate, it is worth being investigated in the current study.  
      The findings of this research are of crucial importance in understanding the enormous popularity of Instagram travel content and its contribution to successful (influencer) marketing. On the one hand, young adults' can use the findings of this study to learn more about the persuasive elements of (sponsored) travel content posted on Instagram. On the other hand, travel influencers and travel agencies can use the findings of this study to learn more about their target audiences and their attitudes towards (sponsored) Instagram posts. Furthermore, the findings of this study will help holiday destinations and travel agencies to further improve their influencer marketing strategies. As shown in a benchmark report of the Influencer Marketing Hub (2021), 90% of the businesses in the world believe that influencer marketing is an effective form of marketing. 75% of them even indicates to dedicate a budget to influencer marketing in 2021. If Instagram content made by travel influencers proves to be effective according to the results of this study, this spending turns out to be a strategic investment. Likewise, if Instagram content made by travel influencers proves to be ineffective according to the results of this study, travel agencies might want to rethink their decision and go back to traditional content made by themselves.
75 2. Literature Review

      The current study aims to investigate how different types of Instagram travel content influence young adults' perceived source credibility, travel planning behaviors and destination choices. This particular angle is chosen by the researcher based on what is found and what is not found in previous research about online travel content. The following sections of this chapter present a structured overview of the most important findings from previous research and formulate the hypotheses of the current investigation. In short, the chapter starts by defining the travel and tourism industry, after which it carefully explains the different stages of travelers' decision-making process. The second part of the chapter is focused on influencer marketing in tourism and discusses important concepts such as credibility, homophily and para-social interactions (PSI).  

75.1 2.1. Travel and Tourism Industry
75.1.1 2.1.1. Travel and Tourism Industry defined
      The travel and tourism industry is an interesting industry. This is due to the fact that it contains a service rather than a product. According to Swarbrooke and Horner (2007), the term tourism can be described as 'the short-term movement of people from their origins to destinations to indulge in different pleasurable activities' (p.4). Over the last couple of decades, the tourism industry has developed into one the fastest growing industries in the world (Camilleri, 2018). Multiple figures show (e.g. Lock, 2020) that travelling on both international and domestic levels has become increasingly popular. 
      It is important to mention, however, that traveling used to be less common than it is right now. Only from the Second World War, people began to perceive traveling as a free-time activity (Blackall, 2019). Before that time, tourists were seen as individuals who traveled to foreign countries because of health-related reasons, educational reasons, spiritual values or self-indulgence (Pearce, 1982). As stated by Blackall (2019), mass tourism developed in the 1960s when significant developments in transportation simplified traveling. Especially the rise of air travel opened doors for tourists to travel and discover the world. 
      Nevertheless, the researcher of the present study acknowledges that traveling has become less self-evident again because of COVID-19 (Fotiadis et al., 2021; Sigala, 2020). To limit the spread of the coronavirus, governments across the globe have taken drastic measurements such as travel bans and lockdowns. Because of the declining demand for global tourism, airlines, hotel chains, tour operators and other tourism suppliers are slowly going out of business. According to influential scholars (e.g. Chang et al., 2020), the pandemic has a serious impact on the tourism industry and it is uncertain how and when it will recover. However, even though the researcher is aware of COVID-19 and its consequences, she does not treat it as a main subject of the investigation. The study's general aim is to investigate the influence of 'ordinary' Instagram travel content, which is uploaded either before or at the beginning of the pandemic. 

75.2 2.2. Travel Planning Behaviors & Destination Choices
75.2.1 2.2.1. Decision-Making in Tourism 
      In order to learn more about the influence of online travel content, it important to understand how travelers make travel decisions. Overall, planning a trip can be an intensive and complex activity. This is because travelers are asked to spend large amounts of money on something that is intangible (Swarbrooke & Horner, 2007). In order to make sure that they make the right decisions, travelers are highly interested and involved in the decision-making process. According to Engel et al. (1990), travelers' decision-making process generally consists of 5 different stages, which are: (1) problem recognition, (2) information search, (3) evaluation of alternatives, (4) purchase decision, and (5) post purchase behavior. 
      In short, travelers' decision-making process starts with the need or desire to travel (Engel et al.,1990). When this need is recognized, travelers begin to search for information about potential destinations, accommodations and/or transports. After collecting information, travelers evaluate and compare the alternatives and choose the most favorable option(s). As explained by Hudson (2008), travelers' final decisions are often influenced by internal and external factors such as reference groups, culture and motivations. It must be highlighted, however, that travelers not only make decisions before they actually go on holiday. Also during their trips (e.g. when they go out for dinner), travelers constantly gain information, evaluate alternatives and make decisions. Besides, evaluations made after a holiday are of crucial importance as they affect the first phases of a travelers' next decision-making process. To be precise, they determine whether or not a traveler will revisit or recommend a previously visited travel destination (Engel et al., 1990). The next sections of this chapter explain every stage of travelers' decision-making process in detail. 







Figure 2. 1
Travellers' decision-making process


Note. This model is adapted from Engel et al. (1990)
75.2.2 
75.2.3 2.2.2. Problem Recognition & Information Search 
      The first two stages of the decision-making process involve problem recognition and information search (Engel et al., 1990). As aforementioned, travelers' decision-making process starts with the need or desire to travel. When this need or desire is recognized, travelers begin to search for useful information. In general, there are two ways in which prospective travelers collect information about potential travel destinations, accommodations and/or transports (Wang & Pizam, 2011). One the one hand, travelers use internal search, which refers to retrieving knowledge from their own memory. On the other hand, travelers use broad external sources such as online web engines and peers. According to Wang and Pizam (2011), especially the latter strategy of data collection has become increasingly popular in recent years. Nowadays, consumers' tourism practices and destination choices are more and more influenced by the opinions of (1) family, (2) friends, (3) destination specific literature, (4) travel consultants, and/or (5) the media. Especially developments in technology explain why consumers have turned into more informed, curious and demanding seekers of external travel information (Law et al., 2009). The increased amount of information offered online results in a constant and growing tendency of travelers to search for recommendations and reviews (Gretzel, 2018). 
      Research to date demonstrates that prospective travelers collect different types of travel content depending on what stage of the decision-making process they are in: pretrip, during trip or posttrip (Choi et al., 2007; Seabra et al., 2007). According to the authors of one of the most comprehensive investigations of online travel planning (Pan & Fesenmaier, 2006), there are 10 key travel decisions for which travelers seek information, namely: (1) travel partners, (2) the travel destination, (3) the expenditure required, (4) activities, (5) travel dates, (6) attractions to visit, (7) transportation providers, (8) the length of the trip, (9) rest stops, and (10) food stops. Nevertheless, it has been proven that most forms of travel information are acquired by travelers in the early stages of the travel decision-making process. This is because, as aforementioned, they want to minimize the risks of making poor destination decisions (Jeng & Fesenmaier, 2002). 

75.2.4 2.2.3. Evaluation of Alternatives & Purchase Decisions
      The next two stages of the decision-making process involve evaluating alternatives and making actual purchase decisions (Engel et al.,1990). After searching for useful information about potential destinations, accommodations and/or transports, prospective travelers evaluate the different opportunities and choose the most favorable option(s). However, although these steps sound logical, there are not always easy to carry out. This is because traveller's final decisions and preferences are constantly influenced by internal and external factors. A model created by Hudson (2008), which is shown in figure 2.2, includes 8 different factors that are known for impacting travelers' final decisions: (1) motivations, (2) culture, (3) gender, (4) age, (5) social class, (6) lifestyle, (7) life cycle, and (8) reference groups. Although all factors are important predictors of travelers' choices, there is one in particular that stands out in today's society: (online) reference groups. 

Figure 2. 2
Factors influencing consumer behavior



Note. This model is adapted from Hudson (2008)
      Among the vast array of information sources prospective travelers can turn to when planning an intangible travel experience, electronic Word of Mouth (eWoM) made by online reference groups is one of the most influential (Cox et al., 2009). As a form of user-generated content, eWoM can be described as 'any positive or negative statement made by potential, actual or former customers about a product or a company, which is made available to a multitude of people and institutions over the Internet' (Moran & Muzellect, 2017, p.150). Because eWoM is produced outside of professional routines, consumers tend to trust and be more influenced by this type of information (Litvin et al., 2007). Especially when it concerns intangible products, such as tourism, these product recommendations are very important (Senecal & Nantel, 2004). According to Hyung-park et al. (2007), exposure to eWoM maximises the likelihood that that prospective travelers visit a recommended destination. 

75.2.5 2.2.4. Post purchase behaviors
      In general, effective eWoM about travel destinations is often distributed by online reference groups who just returned from their vacations. Reference groups can be defined as groups of individuals whom consumers compare themselves against and strive to be like (Childers & Rao, 1992). Foundational tourism theories from the 1970s and the 1980s already integrated the phenomenon of previous tourists serving as reference groups to distribute (electronic) word of mouth about newly discovered destinations (e.g. Plog, 1974). Blog writers, for instance, have long been influential marketing tools for impacting travelers' travel intentions and planning behaviors (Mack et al., 2008). Nowadays, in the age of social media, powerful reference groups are travel influencers who are active on (e.g.) Instagram and YouTube. These online opinion leaders, which can be described as third-party endorsers with attractive online personalities, gained their popularity through the creation and distribution of travel content on social media (Freberg et al., 2011). In general, the most established component of travel influencers' success is the relationships they build and foster between their followers and brands. These relationships are important in order to grow their own media brand and are built on carefully crafted foundations of credibility (Abidin & Ots, 2016). 

75.3 2.3. Influencer Marketing in Tourism
75.3.1 2.3.1. Commercial use of travel influencers
      According to Lou & Yuan (2019), influencer marketing refers to 'a form of marketing where marketers and brands invest in selected influencers to create and/or promote their branded content to the influencers' own followers and to the brands' target consumers' (p.58). Travel organizations have realized the benefits of influencer marketing on Instagram and are increasingly collaborating with travel influencers to advertise their destinations. In return for payments or sponsored products or services, travel influencers are asked to produce and distribute user-generated content on social media that represent their personal opinions and identities. As discussed in an article by Evans et al. (2017), Instagram is one of the most popular channels for travel influencer marketing due to its photo- and video-sharing capabilities. By allowing travel influencers to share visual content in the form of photographs and videos, the platform enables the sponsored promotion of particular travel destinations and the building of travel communities. 
      When assessing Instagram, users encounter a lot of information, including sponsored travel information provided by influencers (Kusumasondjaja & Tjiptono, 2019). To avoid being bombarded by information, they tend to look at only a selection of photos. This means that, in order to attract consumers' attention effectively, influencers need to design striking travel advertisements that captures users' interests. When users stop scrolling to look at one particular photo, their first impression impacts their following behavior towards the photo and the products and/or services that it contains (Tuch et al., 2009). While some studies advise travel influencers to pay attention to the visual complexity of their advertising designs (e.g. Sohn et al., 2017), other studies encourage travel influencers to create simple advertising designs (e.g. Wong et al., 2015). In general, this is because complex advertisements distract Instagram users from the actual messages of the advertisement. 
      In general, as shown in figure 2.3, travel influencers on Instagram are able to advertise travel products and/or destinations in 4 different ways (Sharma, 2018). Firstly, they can choose to showcase products and/or destinations in regular Instagram photos or in 1-minute videos. These most frequently used features of the photo- and video-sharing application allow influencers to tag commercial companies such as travel agencies and to write appropriate descriptions (=captions). Secondly, travel influencers can choose to showcase products and/or destinations in carousal/dynamic advertisements. The biggest difference between these types of advertisements and the aforementioned Instagram photos and videos are for whom they are made available. While regular Instagram photos and videos are made available for travel influencers' followers, carousal/dynamic advertisements are made available for explicit target audiences. And lastly, travel influencers can choose to showcase products and/or destinations through Instagram stories. These specific stories are different from carousal/dynamic advertisements and regular Instagram photos and videos, as they are only available on the application for 24 hours (Sharma, 2018). 





Figure 2. 3
Types of Instagram advertisements
      


Note. This figure is adapted from Sharma (2018)

75.3.2 2.3.2. Authenticity & Credibility
      Previous scholars argue that the two key norms of the influencer industry are authenticity and credibility (Wellman et al., 2020). In general, these two norms contribute to an ethical framework premised on being true to one's self and one's audience. The first norm, which is authenticity, can be described as the quality of being real or true. The second norm, which is credibility, refers to the 'quality of the information or a source that may or may not result in trusting intentions and/or behaviors' (Weitzl, 2014, p.115). Especially the latter norm is of crucial importance in this research. This is because, as discussed in an article by Weitzl et al. (2016), credibility is an important predictor of eWoM persuasiveness. According to Ye et al. (2011), tourists generally perceive eWoM created by fellow travelers as more objective, up-to-date and enjoyable than information created by commercial sources such travel agencies. 
      Based on the aforementioned insights, the current study expects to find that young adults perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as more credible than Instagram content made by travel agencies. The corresponding hypothesis is:
      
      Hypothesis 1a: Young adults perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as more credible than Instagram content made by travel agencies.
      Furthermore, this study assumes that young adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies in their travel planning behaviors and destination choices. Particularly, this expectation is based on what is written in an article by Sokolova and Kefi (2020). According to the authors, Internet users often construct illusionary relationships with influencers on social media platforms such as Instagram and YouTube. Such relationships, which are also called para-social interactions (PSI), are self-established by the Internet users after subscribing to the influencers' channels or after following the influencers' posts. The main difference between normal relationships and para-social relationships is that normal relationships are symmetric and mutual, whereas para-social relationships are asymmetric and not mutual (Horton & Wohl, 1956; Dibble et al., 2016; Kelman, 1958). This means that, frequently, influencers are unfamiliar with the Internet users and unconsciously take part in the unidirectional 'friendships'.  From a business perspective, para-social interactions are beneficial for marketers and advertisers. By 'looking' at and talking to their followers through the camera, influencers are able to establish illusionary intimacy and emotional connections. These connections not only influence users' perceived source credibility, brand attitudes and purchase intentions, but also users' general behaviors. As stated by Sokoloca and Perez (2021), Internet users that feel an emotional connection with a particular influencer are more likely to get persuade to do things. In reaction to this finding, the current study formulated the aforementioned hypothesis and the hypotheses mentioned below.  
      A concept that is closely connected to para-social interaction (PSI) is homophiliy. According to by Ladhari et al. (2020), homophily refers to the extent to which people who interact with each other are similar in terms of attitudes, values and morals, appearance and/or background. When it comes to social media, the homophily notion suggests that Internet users prefer to associate themselves with influencers who are similar in terms of norms and values (= reference groups). In general, users that perceive much similarity with a particular influencer are more likely to get attached (and thus to construct para-social relationships), to recommended the influencer to others and to buy or do things that the influencer shows. Again, this is particularly beneficial for marketers and advertisers, as it facilitates the persuasion of consumers (Ladhari et al., 2020).     

      Hypothesis 1b: Young adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies in their travel planning behaviors. 

      Hypothesis 1c: Young adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies to choose travel destinations. 
      
      Hypothesis 2a: Young adults are more likely to use Instagram content in their travel planning behaviors when they perceive the source(s) of the content as credible.
      
      Hypothesis 2b: Young adults are more likely to use Instagram content in their travel destination choices when they perceive the source(s) of the content as credible.

      Another expectation of the current study is that perceived source credibility mediates the relationships between type of content (1 = sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers, 2 = non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers, 3 = Instagram content made by travel agencies, and 4 = anonymous Instagram travel content) and young adults' travel planning behaviors and destination choices. This particular expectation is based on research conducted by Hovland et al. (1953). In their article, the authors state that whenever consumers are exposed to persuasive messages of marketers or influencers, their perceived source credibility affects their attitudes and behavioral intentions. The corresponding hypotheses for this expectation are:
      
      Hypothesis 3a: Young adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers in their travel planning behaviors, however, this effect is mediated by their perceived source credibility.

      Hypothesis 3b: Young adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers to choose travel destinations, however, this effect is mediated by their perceived source credibility.

75.3.3 2.3.3. Travel influencers' disclosure dilemma 
      As aforementioned, authenticity and credibility are two important concepts when it comes to the work travel influencers. In order to remain authentic, travel influencers have to develop credibility with both their followers and commercial brands (Wellman et al., 2020). This is generally a difficult task, as both stakeholders have different expectations about their connections with the influencers (Abidin & Ots, 2016). One way in which travel influencers build credibility with their followers is by only working with commercial brands that they would use in their daily lives. Furthermore, another way in which travel influencers build credibility is by explicitly or implicitly disclosing their sponsored user-generated content (Lee & Kim, 2020). This particular disclosure is supposed to trigger followers' conceptual persuasion knowledge, which can be defined as the cognitive dimension that enables the recognition of advertising, its originator and its intended audience (Boerman et al., 2012). 
      However, even though the practice of disclosure fulfills the travel influencers' legal obligations, it usually has a negative influence on the economic success of the content (Janssen et al., 2016). Effective advertising disclosures that capture the attention of the audience enable the recognition of the content as paid and, subsequently, stimulate appropriate response strategies. As stated by scholars such as Campbell et al. (2013), followers who recognize the travel influencers' content as paid often response with negative emotions. The authors argue that sponsored user-generated content is generally less successful and persuasive when audiences recognize it as advertisements (Campbell et al., 2013). 
      In reaction to these findings, the current study hypothesizes that advertisement recognition moderates the relationship between type of content (sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers vs. non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel agencies) and young adults' perceived source credibility. This means that young adults are expected to perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as less credible when they recognize that the content contains sponsored elements. Once again, to better illustrate the expectation of this research, the following hypothesis is formulated:

      Hypothesis 4: Young adults perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as more credible, however, this effect is weaker when they recognize that the content contains sponsored elements.


75.4 2.4. Hypotheses & Proposed Conceptual Model
      In summary, this study aims to examine 8 hypotheses. At first, it strives to test the direct relationship between the different types of content (1 = sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers, 2 = non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers, 3 = Instagram content made by travel agencies, and 4 = anonymous Instagram travel content) and young adults' perceived source credibility (H1a). The overall expectation is that young adults perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as more credible than Instagram content made by travel agencies. Secondly, it aspires to investigate the direct relationships between the different types of content and young adults' travel planning behaviors (H1b) and destination choices (H1c). When it comes to these relationships, the current study expects to find that young adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies in their travel planning behaviors and destination choices. Thirdly, the investigation strives to examine the relationship between young adults' perceived source credibility and their travel planning behaviors (H2a) and destination choices (H2b). According to the assumptions of the researcher, young adults are more likely to use Instagram content while planning a holiday or choosing a travel destination when they perceive the source(s) of the content as credible. And last, but not least, this research aims to analyze the indirect effects of young adults' perceived source credibility (H3) and advertisement recognition abilities (H4). While the former variable is expected to mediate the relationships between the different types of content and young adults' travel planning behaviors and destination choices, the latter variable is expected to moderate the relationship between the different types of content and young adults' perceived source credibility. For a clearer overview of the expected relationships, please look at table 2.1 and figure 2.3.  

Table 2. 1: 

Proposed hypotheses
NumberHypothesisH1aYoung adults perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as more credible than Instagram content made by travel agencies.H1bYoung adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies in their travel planning behaviors. H1cYoung adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies to choose travel destinations. H2aYoung adults are more likely to use Instagram content in their travel planning behaviors when they perceive the source(s) of the content as credible. H2bYoung adults are more likely to use Instagram content in their travel destination choices when they perceive the source(s) of the content as credible.H3aYoung adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers in their travel planning behaviors, however, this effect is mediated by their perceived source credibility.H3bYoung adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers to choose travel destinations, however, this effect is mediated by their perceived source credibility.H4Young adults perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as more credible, however, this effect is weaker when they recognize that the content contains sponsored elements.  


Figure 2. 4
Proposed conceptual model


Note. This moderated mediation model is adapted from Hayes (2018)


76 3. Methodology

76.1 3.1. Research Method
      In order to investigate how travel content published on Instagram impacts young adults' perceived source credibility, travel planning behaviors and destination choices, a quantitative research was conducted. According to Sukamolson (2007), this research method generally refers to 'the numerical representation and manipulation of observations for the purpose of describing and explaining the phenomena that those observations reflect' (p. 2). Because quantitative research has a deductive approach, it uses existing theory to reach a conclusion about empirical data. Overall, quantitative research was very suitable for this investigation as it enabled the researcher to answer the following research question: To what extent does travel content on Instagram (made by travel influencers vs. travel agencies) influence young adults' travel planning behaviors and destination choices?.  

76.2 3.2. Research Design
76.2.1 3.2.1. Online Experimental Survey
      The research question and the corresponding hypotheses of this investigation were examined through an online between-subjects experimental survey with four conditions (including one control group). In short, this specific research design combined an online survey with some of the most crucial features of an experiment (e.g. the manipulation of variables). The researcher of this investigation chose this research design as it enabled her to accurately measure the causal relationships between the different variables at stake (Neuman, 2014). Besides, as also stated by Bellman (2017), this research design fulfilled all conditions of causality and guaranteed the researcher with a high degree of control and internal validity. 
      Furthermore, another reason for conducting an online experiment was because of COVID-19. Due to the global pandemic, real life encounters between the researcher and her respondents were not recommended. The Netherlands, the country in which the investigation took place, maintained severe restrictions to flatten the effects of the virus. Luckily, with the use of the online survey platform Qualtrics (www.qualtrics.com), the researcher was still able to conduct the experiment in a professional and efficient manner. According to Bellman (2017), online experiments have some advantages over real-life experiments, as they facilitate the recruitment of a diverse sample. Besides, because online surveys allow respondents to take part from their own devices in their own homes, they lower the efforts to participate. All in all, these advantages of online experimental surveys facilitated the search process of respondents and positively impacted the response rate (Bellman, 2017).    

76.2.2 3.2.2. Experimental Stimuli
      The experimental stimuli of this particular investigation consisted of four types of Instagram travel content: (1) sponsored Instagram content made by a travel influencer, (2) non-sponsored Instagram content made by a travel influencer, (3) Instagram content made by a travel agency, and (4) anonymous Instagram travel content. Which experimental stimuli respondents got exposed to was dependent on which condition they were in. While respondents in condition 1 got exposed to sponsored Instagram content made by the travel influencer Jack Morris (@doyoutravel), respondents in condition 2 got exposed to non-sponsored Instagram content made by the same travel influencer. Furthermore, respondents in condition 3 got exposed to Instagram content made by the travel agency called Booking.com (@bookingcom), while respondents in condition 4 (control group) got exposed to anonymous Instagram travel content. Table 3.1 provides a systematic overview of the experimental stimuli per condition. 

Table 3. 1
Experimental stimuli per condition
ConditionExperimental stimulus1Sponsored Instagram content made by the travel influencer Jack Morris2Non-sponsored Instagram content made by the travel influencer Jack Morris3Instagram content made by the travel agency Booking.com4Anonymous Instagram travel content (no source) 

	As aforementioned, respondents in condition 1 and 2 got exposed to Instagram content made by the travel influencer Jack Morris (2 levels: sponsored vs. non-sponsored). Jack Morris, who is currently 30 years old, originally comes from Manchester, England (Cosmopolitan, 2018). Around 8 years ago, he started travelling to escape from his job as a 9 to 5 carpet cleaner. His first intercontinental trip brought him to Thailand and was supposed to take 2 months. However, with the use of the social media platform Instagram, Jack could extend this stay on the island. By posting dreamy photographs of the most scenic places on his Instagram page (@doyoutravel), Jack managed to make a little bit of money. This allowed him to stay on the road a little longer. Nowadays, the 30-years-old Englishman is one of the most popular travel influencers in the world. He currently lives in Bali, has more than 2.5 million followers on Instagram and earns around $9,000 per sponsored post (Cosmopolitan, 2018). According to himself, it is mainly the authenticity of his photos that attracts the audience. In an interview with MediaKix (2017), he said: 'I think the way I do my photos has quite a real approach to it. It is a dreamy kind of life but at the same time it is real and organic. I feel like a lot of people can relate to it, or at least aspire to do what I do' (para.15)
	The Instagram posts of Jack Morris were chosen by the researcher for two specific reasons. Firstly, they were chosen because of their ability to appeal to both males and females. This is because most of Jack's Instagram pictures depict both him and his (ex-)girlfriend Lauren Bullen (@gypsea_lust). During their relationship from 2016 to 2020, the couple traveled to more that 20 countries together. 'A lot of people, I think, prefer to see a couple. The dream, I guess, is to travel with your partner and not so much on your own', said Jack in the aforementioned interview (Mediakix, 2017, para.16). Furthermore, the Instagram posts of Jack Morris were chosen because of their popularity. According to Beganovich (2021), Jack Morris himself currently belongs to the 5 most popular and influential travel influencers in the world. 

Figure 3. 1
Instagram page of Jack Morris (@doyoutravel)



      Respondents in condition 3 got exposed to Instagram content made by Booking.com. Overall, Booking.com can be described as an online travel agency that provides travelers with reservation services (www.booking.com). In general, the company acts as an intermediary agent between guests who want to make accommodation reservations and hotels, properties or temporary rentals. Originally, Booking.com was founded as Booking.nl in 1996. The founder of the company, Geert-Jan Bruinsma, created the website for people in or visiting The Netherlands to book a hotel room online. Currently, the company can be described as one of the best-known online travel agencies in the world (next to e.g. Airbnb and TripAdvisor). It is available in 43 different languages and offers its customers around 1.07 million overnight stays. On its Instagram page (@bookingcom; 1.4 million followers), users can find a variety of posts: from user-generated content made by travel influencers to content made by the company itself. In this particular research, the main focus was on travel content made by Booking.com itself. In his way, the researcher was able to investigate the differences between the influence of Instagram content made by travel influencers and the influence of Instagram content made by travel agencies.

Figure 3. 2
Instagram page of Booking.com (@bookingcom)



      To be precise, every condition contained 4 Instagram travel posts. This means that, in total, the experimental survey consisted of 16 experimental stimuli (4x4). It is of crucial importance to mention that all Instagram travel posts were consistent in terms of images, composition and fonts. Besides, all Instagram pictures depicted the same destinations: Italy, Turkey, Finland and Bali. In this way, the researcher made sure that all posts were measuring the same underlying variables. In terms of sources, however, the Instagram posts slightly differed. As aforementioned, the Instagram posts in condition 1 and 2 were published by the travel influencer Jack Morris, while the Instagram posts in condition 3 were published by the travel agency Booking.com. Moreover, the Instagram posts in control group 4 were published by an anonymous source. The researcher carefully manipulated the content with the use of the graphic design platform Canva Pro (www.canva.com). 
      Another difference between the Instagram travel posts were the captions. While the captions of the sponsored Instagram posts clearly mentioned brand names (e.g. '@Hertz') and partnerships ('sponsored content') to make it look sponsored and to facilitate advertisement recognition, the captions of the non-sponsored travel posts did not. Furthermore, while the captions of the travel influencer Jack Morris were written in the first person for the sake of storytelling, the captions of the travel agency Booking.com were not. Some examples of the Instagram travel posts used in this research are depicted below. For a full overview of the experimental stimuli, please go to page 67.
      It is important to mention that the researcher of this investigation aimed to create experimental stimuli that were both realistic and simple (Geuens & De Pelsmacker, 2017). The realistic touch was given to the stimuli by using existing content creators, namely: Jack Morris and Booking.com. Furthermore, to enhance the simplicity of the stimuli, the researcher decided to remove the comment sections from the Instagram posts. In this way, it was made sure that the attention of the respondents was only attracted by the images and the captions of the travel content.  

Figure 3. 3
Example of sponsored Instagram post made by Jack Morris (@doyoutravel)


Figure 3. 4
Example of non-sponsored Instagram post made by Jack Morris (@doyoutravel)


Figure 3. 5
Example of Instagram content made by travel agency Booking.com 


Figure 3. 6
Example of anonymous Instagram travel content


76.2.3 3.2.3. Procedure
      Young adults between the age of 18 and 24 were invited to take part in the experimental survey through the (social media) platforms WhatsApp, Instagram, Facebook, LinkedIn and SurveySwap. After clicking on an anonymous web link in one of the recruitment messages of the researcher, potential respondents were sent to Qualtrics (www.qualtrics.com). The introduction of the experimental survey familiarized the respondents with the topic of the study and the corresponding objectives. After informed consent was given, the respondents were asked to fill in their age. It is important to mention that respondents who indicated to be younger than 18 were sent to the end of the survey. This is because under aged respondents were not allowed in this research. 
      Subsequently, the respondents were randomly assigned to one of the following conditions: condition 1, condition 2, condition 3 or control group 4. While the respondents in condition 1 and 2 got exposed to Instagram content made by the travel influencer Jack Morris (2 levels: sponsored vs. not sponsored), the respondents in condition 3 got exposed to Instagram content made by the travel agency Booking.com. Moreover, the respondents in the control group were exposed to anonymous Instagram travel content (no source). After the respondents had seen and studied the content, they were sent to the next part of the experimental survey. This part consisted of questions about the respondents' perceived source credibility, travel planning behaviors and destination choices (= dependent variables). Furthermore, this part tested the respondents' advertisement - and source recognition abilities (= manipulation checks). 
      The last part of the survey, which consisted of demographic questions, aimed to collect information related to the respondents' gender, nationality, level of education, social media usage and general travel motivations. When the respondents reached the very end of the survey, they were thanked for their participation and exposed to the real purpose of the experiment. Besides, because the researcher used deception throughout the experiment, the end of the survey also contained a small disclaimer (Neuman, 2014). This means that the respondents were informed about the fact that some of the content they had seen was fictional. 

76.3 3.3. Sampling
76.3.1 3.3.1. Sampling Technique
      According to Babbie (2011), the units of analysis are 'the what or whom being studied' (p.101). In this particular study, the unit of analysis were English-speaking young adults between the age of 18 and 24 who were familiar with Instagram and social media influencers. As described by Setiawan et al. (2018), this particular age group (also known as generation Z) is predicted to be tourism's main target audience in the next five to ten years. 
      The non-probability sampling technique called snowball sampling was used by the researcher to find respondents of this generation. This particular sampling technique was suitable for this investigation as it was cost-efficient and relatively simple to carry out (Babbie, 2011). On the (social networking) sites WhatsApp, Instagram, Facebook, LinkedIn and SurveySwap, the researcher posted several recruitment messages in which she called for respondents. Through liking, sharing and commenting on the recruitment messages, located respondents (in)directly recommended other possible respondents. It is important to mention that the researcher avoided recruiting direct friends and family, since their responses could lead to bias results. In total, the researcher sought to find at least 120 respondents, which means 30 respondents per condition (30 x 4). 

76.3.2 3.3.2. Total Sample Description
      Overall, N = 205 respondents filled in the experimental survey (N = 51 in condition 1; N = 51 in condition 2; N = 52 in condition 3; N = 51 in control group 4). However, respondents that did not meet the age requirements, or failed to answer most of the survey questions, were excluded from the data analysis. This means that, eventually, a total of N = 134 responses was used to answer the research question of this study (N = 34 in condition 1; N = 33 in condition 2; N = 33 in condition 3; N = 34 in control group 4). When looking at the number of respondents per condition, it is safe to state that every condition had a similar number of drop-outs. 
	The average age of the respondents was M = 21.60 years (N = 134, SD = 1.40). In terms of gender, 40.3% of the respondents was male (N = 54) and 59.7% of the respondents was female (N = 80). Furthermore, 56.0% of the respondents (which is the majority) indicated to have obtained a Bachelor's degree in college. Besides, the sample of this research was relatively international, as the respondents indicated to have 11 different nationalities. While most respondents came from The Netherlands (N = 118), there were also respondents from Afghanistan (N = 1), Austria (N = 2), Belgium (N = 2), Burkina Faso (N = 1), China (N = 1), France (N = 1), Italy (N = 1), Sierra Leone (N = 1), The USA (N = 2), and Vietnam (N = 1). In total, 78.4% of the respondents (N = 105) indicated to be a student. The other 21.6% of the respondents expressed to be employed for wages, self-employed or out of work and looking for work. 
	The sample of this particular investigation can also be described in terms of Instagram usage and general travel behaviors. Firstly, 97.0% of the respondents (N = 130) indicated to use the photo- and video-sharing platform Instagram. On average, these respondents spend M = 3.22 hours on this Social Networking Site (SNS) on a daily basis. Secondly, 92.5% of the respondents (N = 124) signified to usually make trips for tourism. The other 7.5% of the respondents indicated to usually make trips for business, study or visiting acquaintances. 

76.3.3 3.3.3. Sample Description per Condition 
      In condition 1, the average age of the respondents was M = 21.79 years (N = 34, SD = 1.32). Furthermore, 41,2% of the respondents in this condition was male (N = 14) and 58.8% was female (N = 20). The most frequently obtained degree in this condition was a Bachelor's degree in college. This is because 61.8% of the respondents (N = 21) indicated to have obtained this degree. In terms of Instagram usage, 91.2% of the respondents (N = 31) signified to use the photo- and video-sharing application. On average, these respondents spend M = 4.97 hours on the platform on a daily basis (SD = 4.93). While most respondents in this condition came from The Netherlands (N = 28), there were also respondents from Austria (N = 1), Belgium (N = 1), Burkina Faso (N = 1), Sierra Leone (N = 1) and The USA (N = 1). In total, 79.4% of the respondents in this condition (N = 27) indicated to be a student. 
	The average age of the respondents in condition 2 was M = 21.85 (N = 33, SD = 1.18). Furthermore, in this condition, gender was distributed as follows: 48.5% of the respondents was male (N = 16) and 51.5% of the respondents was female (N = 17). Just like in condition 1, the most frequently obtained degree in this condition was a Bachelor's degree in college (N = 20). Besides, all respondents in this condition (N = 33) indicated to use the social media platform Instagram for approximately 4.34 hours per day (SD = 3.87). While 87.9% of the respondents from this group indicated to have a Dutch nationality (N = 29), there were also respondents with a Belgian nationality (N = 1) and a Chinese nationality (N = 1). In total, 78.8% of the respondents in this condition (N = 26) indicated to be a student. 
	The respondents in condition 3 were, on average, M = 21.24 years old (N = 33, SD = 1.37). In terms of gender, 39.4% of the respondents in this condition was male (N = 13) and 60.6% was female (N = 20). Although quite a few respondents in this group indicated to be high school graduates (N = 9), the most frequently obtained degree was still a Bachelor's degree in college (N = 18). Again, all respondents in this condition expressed to use the social media platform Instagram on a daily basis (N = 33), however, a little less often than the respondents in condition 2 (M = 4.05 hours, SD = 3.25). Furthermore, 90.9% of the respondents in this condition came from The Netherlands (N = 30). The other 9.1% of the respondents indicated to come from France (N = 1), The USA (N = 1) and Vietnam (N = 1). In total, 75.8% of the respondents in this condition (N = 25) signified to be a student.
	And last, but not least, the average age of the respondents in control group 4 was M = 21.53 (SD = 1.32). In this group, the male/female ratio was as follows: while only 32.4% of the respondents was male (N = 11), 67.6% of the respondents was female (N = 23). Furthermore, from the N = 34 respondents in this group, N =16 indicated to have obtained a Bachelor's degree in college. When it came to social media usage, N = 33 of the respondents signified to use the social media platform Instagram. On average, they spend M = 2,74 hours per day on the aforementioned application. Again, although most respondents in this group came from The Netherlands (N = 31), there were also foreign respondents from Afghanistan (N = 1), Austria (N = 1), and Italy (N = 1). In total, 79.4% of the respondents in this group (N = 27) claimed to be a student. Table 3.3 provides a detailed overview of the conditions and its respondents. 
      In order to increase external validity of the measurements used in this study, the researcher randomly assigned the survey respondents to one of the four conditions. To test if the random assignment of respondents was successful, two randomization checks were conducted. The results of a chi-square test for independence showed that gender did not significantly differ among the experimental conditions, X2 (3, N = 134) = 1.83, p = .608. Furthermore, the results of an one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) showed that age did not significantly differ among the experimental conditions, F (3, 130) = 1.30, p = .27. This means that the respondents were evenly distributed among the conditions during the experiment. The random assignment was successful and, therewith, provided a base for valid comparisons between respondents from different conditions. Tables 3.2 and 3.3 provide a clear overview of the results of the randomization checks.


Table 3. 2
Summary of experimental conditions
Sponsored SMINon-sponsored SMITravel agencyAnonymousN34333334Age*21.7921.8521.2421.53Male
Female
Degree**
Employment status**
Nationality**
Instagram users
H on Instagram*
Travel**14
20
Bachelor
Student
Netherlands
31
4.97
Tourism16
17
Bachelor
Student
Netherlands
33
4.34
Tourism13
20
Bachelor
Student
Netherlands
33
4.05
Tourism11
23
Bachelor
Student
Netherlands
33
2.74
Tourism*Average      ** Most common

Table 3. 3
Distribution of gender per condition
Sponsored SMINon-sponsored SMITravel agencyAnonymousTotalMale1416131154Female2017202380Total34333334134

Table 3. 4

Average age per condition
NMeanStd. DeviationMinimumMaximumSponsored SMI3421.791.3211924Non-sponsored SMI3321.851.1762024Travel agency3321.241.3701824Anonymous3421.531.6741824Total13421.601.4041824
76.4 3.4. Operationalization
76.4.1 3.4.1. Independent Variable Type of Content
      As shown in the proposed conceptual model (see figure 2.4), type of content served as the independent variable in this research (= predictor variable). This means that the researcher expected to find significant relationships between this variable and the dependent variables of this study (Babbie, 2011). At first, the researcher expected to uncover that young adults perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as more credible than Instagram content made by travel agencies (H1a). Secondly, the researcher expected to uncover that young adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies in their travel planning behaviors and destination choices (H1b & H1c). Furthermore, the former relationship was expected to be moderated by young adults' advertisement recognition (H4), while the latter relationship was expected to be mediated by young adults' perceived source credibility (H3). More information about the other variables of this research can be found in the paragraphs below.
      In this particular investigation, type of content was operationalized as a categorical variable with 4 categories: (1) sponsored Instagram content made by a travel influencer, (2) non-sponsored Instagram content made by a travel influencer, (3) Instagram content made by a travel agency, and (4) anonymous Instagram travel content. In the online experimental survey, the categorical variable was not directly measured but served as the experimental stimuli that respondents got exposed to (= conditions). In the survey flow of the experimental survey (p. 82), respondents' exposure to the experimental stimuli occurred after the introductory questions and before the measurement of the dependent variables. As aforementioned, the respondents of the experimental survey were randomly assigned to one of the conditions after answering questions regarding their participation in this research and their age. 

76.4.2 3.4.2. Dependent Variable Travel Planning Behavior
      One of the two dependent variables in this research was travel planning behaviors (= outcome variable). In the experimental survey, this continuous variable measured the extent to which young adults use Instagram travel content when planning a vacation. As aforementioned, the researcher expected to find that young adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies in their travel planning behaviors (H1b). Moreover, the researcher also expected to find that this relationship is mediated by young adults' perceived source credibility (H3a).      
      According to Neuman (2014), researchers are recommended to use pre-existing, reliable scales to measure the different variables at stake. For this reason, in order to measure respondents' travel planning behaviors, the researcher used the Travel Planning Behavior scale of Tsiakali (2018). This particular scale can be described as a 5-point Likert scale with 4 dimensions and 11 different items. As also shown in table 3.3., the 4 dimensions of this scale are: travel need recognition, information search, evaluation of alternatives, and purchase decision. Furthermore, examples of items that make up this scale are (1) pictures like the ones I just saw inspire me to travel and (2) pictures like the ones I just saw influence what to do/see and destinations. The answer options of this scale have an anchor of 1 being strongly disagree and 5 being strongly agree. According to a reliability test conducted in IBM SPSS, this particular scale was highly reliable (Cronbach's α = .89).
76.4.3 
76.4.4 3.4.3. Dependent Variable Destination Choices 
      The second dependent variable in this investigation was destination choices. Similar to travel planning behaviors, destination choices served as a continuous variable in this research. The researcher of this investigation expected to find significant relationships between type of content and this particular variable. As formulated in hypothesis 1c, young adults were expected to be more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies to choose travel destinations. As formulated in hypothesis 3b, furthermore, this relationship was assumed to be mediated by young adults' perceived source credibility. 
      The researcher used another 5-point Likert scale to measure respondents' destination choices. This pre-existing scale from Kneesel et al. (2010) consists of 2 different items: (1) to what extent would you recommend the destinations shown in the pictures to your friends and family?, and (2) to what extent would you consider visiting, or revisiting, the destinations shown in the pictures?.  In this particular study, the answer options of the first item had an anchor of 1 being not recommend at all and 5 being definitely recommend. Furthermore, the answer options of the second item had an anchor of 1 being not consider at all and 5 being definitely consider. Another reliability test conducted in IBM SPSS showed that this particular scale was reliable as well (Cronbach's α = .77). 
      
76.4.5 3.4.4. Mediating Variable Source Credibility
      This particular study included one mediating variable. According to MacKinnon (2015), mediating variables explain the relationships between the independent variable(s) and the dependent variable(s) of an investigation. In this particular research, source credibility was not only perceived as a dependent variable (H1a). As also shown in figure 3.4., source credibility was also perceived as a mediating variable that explained the relationships between type of content, travel planning behaviors and destination choices (H3).   
	In order to measure how respondents perceived the source of the Instagram content (travel influencer vs. travel agency), the researcher used the Celebrity Endorsement scale of Ohanian (1990). Originally, this 7-point semantic differential scale consists of three dimensions: trustworthiness, expertise and attractiveness. However, for the purpose of this particular study, the researcher only measured the former two dimensions. The first dimension, trustworthiness, was made up out of the following 5 items: (1) undependable - dependable, (2) dishonest - honest, (3) unreliable - reliable, (4) insincere - sincere, and (5) untrustworthy - trustworthy. The second dimension, expertise, was made up out of 5 other items: (1) not an expert - an expert, (2) inexperienced - experienced, (3) unknowledgeable - knowledgeable, (4) unqualified - qualified, (5) unskilled - skilled. A reliability test showed that the scale was highly reliable (Cronbach's α = .85). 
76.4.6 
76.4.7 3.4.5. Moderating Variable Advertisement Recognition 
      Next to one mediating variable, this study also included one moderating variable. Moderating variables moderate the relationship between the independent variable(s) on the dependent variable(s) of a study, such that the influence is present for one group (i.e., males) but not for another (i.e., females) (MacKinnon, 2011). As shown in the proposed conceptual model of this research (figure 2.4), advertisement recognition was expected to moderate the relationship between type of content and perceived source credibility. 
      During the experimental survey, the variable advertisement recognition was measured by using a multiple-choice question with two answer options. The question was formulated as follows: 'Do you agree or disagree that the pictures you just saw contain sponsored elements?' (1 = agree and 2 = disagree). It is important to mention, however, that this particular question also served as one of the manipulation checks of the experiment. The other manipulation check, which measured source recognition, consisted of the multiple-choice question 'Do you remember who created this content?' (1 = a travel influencer and 2 = a travel agency),  
	Moreover, the moderating variable also took a different form. As aforementioned, the respondents of the online experimental survey were randomly exposed to one of the 4 experimental stimuli. E.g. while the respondents in condition 1 were exposed to sponsored Instagram content made by a travel influencer, the respondents in condition 3 were exposed to non-sponsored Instagram content made by a travel agency. When analyzing the respondents' answers in the computer program IBM SPSS, a new variable was computed. By using the values 1 to 4, this new variable showed the researcher which respondent was exposed to which experimental stimuli.    

76.4.8 3.4.6. Control Variables
      Other important variables in quantitative research are control variables. According to Babbie (2011), control variables refer to extraneous variables that could potentially influence or explain the answers given by the respondents. Furthermore, they are assumed to have a confounding role, which means that they could lead to distortion in the expected relationships (Spector & Brannick, 2011). In this particular study, there were several control variables that might have impacted the answers given by the target audience: gender, level of education, employment status, nationality, Instagram usage and travel behavior. By including these variables into the study, the researcher enabled herself to present a more accurate analysis of the data. Besides, these variables helped the researcher to check if the random assignment of respondents was successful (see section 3.3.3)
      
Table 3. 5

Constructs, dimensions & scales
ConstructsDimensionsScalesSource credibility
(Ohanian, 1990)Trustworthiness 7-point semantic differential scale
5 items
Expertise7-point semantic differential scale
5 itemsTravel planning behavior
(Tsiakali, 2018)Travel need recognition5-point Likert scale 
2 items
Information search5-point Likert scale 
3 itemsEvaluation of alternatives5-point Likert scale 
3 items
Purchase decision5-point Likert scale 
3 itemsDestination choices
(Kneesel et al., 2010)Two what extent would you recommend the destinations shown in the pictures to your friends and family?

To what extent would you consider visiting, or revisiting, the destinations shown in the pictures? 5-point Likert scale 






5-point Likert scaleAdvertisement recognition  
(Boerman et al., 2012)Do you agree or disagree that the pictures you just saw contain sponsored elements?Multiple-choice question
2 answer options Source recognition  
No sourceDo you remember who created this content? Multiple-choice question
2 answer options

76.4.9 3.4.7. Explorative Factor Analyses
      Multiple exploratory factor analyses and reliability checks were carried out by the researcher in order to double check the reliability of the measurements used in this research.  The first factor analysis was conducted to test the Celebrity Endorsement scale of Ohanian (1990). Prior to performing the analysis, the suitability of the data was assessed. The researcher concluded that the scale met all the a priori requirements, as it was continuous, normally distributed and consisted of more than three items (Pallant, 2016).  Inspection of the explorative factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Direct Oblimin rotation showed that the scale also met all the a posteriori requirements. The correlation matrix revealed, for example, the presence of many coefficients of .3 and above. Besides, the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin value Measure of Sampling Adequacy was .87, exceeding the recommended value of .6. Furthermore, the Bartlett's Test of Sphericity was significant, p < .001. The explorative factor analysis further revealed the presence of two components with Eigenvalues exceeding 1, explaining 49,7% and 18,3% of the variance, X2 (N = 134, 45) = 727.61. This means that the 10 items that make up the original Celebrity Endorses scale could be clustered into two components: (1) expertise and (2) trustworthiness. This is in line with the findings of Ohanian himself (1990). 
      The first component of the Celebrity Endorses scale, expertise, included the following five items: (1) unskilled - skilled, (2) unexperienced - experienced, (3) unknowledgeable -  knowledgeable, (4) not an expert - expert, and (5) unqualified - qualified. A reliability check showed that this subscale was highly reliable with a Cronbach's α of .88. The second component of the scale, trustworthiness, also included five items: (1) dishonest - honest, (2) unreliable - reliable, (3) untrustworthy - trustworthy, (4) insincere - sincere, and (5) undependable - dependable.  Another reliability check showed that this subscale was highly reliable as well (Cronbach's α = .86). Table 3.6 represents the factor loadings of the two components found.

Table 3. 6
Factor and reliability test for source credibility scale (N = 134)
ItemExpertiseTrustworthinessIn my opinion, the travel influencer/travel agency/ content creator can be described as...Skilled.88Experienced.86Knowledgeable.81An expert .80Qualified.76Honest .91Reliable .88Trustworthy .88Sincere .82Dependable.43R2
Cronbach's α.50
.88.18
.86
      Another explorative factor analysis was conducted to test the Travel Planning Behavior scale of Tsiakali (2018). Again, prior to performing the analysis, the suitability of the data was assessed. After inspection of the correlation matrix, the researcher found that most coefficients had a value of .3 or higher. The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Measure of Sampling Adequacy was .86 and the Bartlett's Test of Sphericity was significant, p< .001, X2 (N = 134, 55) = 533.97. The results of the explorative factor analysis using the Principal Components extraction with Direct Oblimin rotation showed that the items of the travel planning behavior scale could be clustered into four components. Table 3.7 shows the factor loadings of the four components found.  
      The first component of the Travel Planning Behavior scale, travel need recognition, included the following two items: (1) inspire me to travel and (2) make me seriously consider to go on a vacation even though I had no intention before. According to a reliability check, this subscale was reliable with a Cronbach's α of .74. The second component of the scale, information search, included three items. These were: (1) help me find travel information when I need it, (2) reduce my effort to find travel information, and (3) increase the quality of travel information. Another reliability check showed that this subscale was reliable with a Cronbach's α of .72. The third component of the Travel Planning Behavior scale was called evaluation of alternatives. The results of the explorative factor analysis revealed that this component consisted of the following three items: (1) help me evaluate/compare travel destinations/services/suppliers, (2) lead me to expand my consideration set, and (3) help me to reconfirm my travel selections. And lastly, the fourth component of the scale, purchase decision, was made up out of the items (1) help me to book travel services/suppliers, (2) influence what to do/see at destinations, and (3) help me purchase complementary destinations/services/suppliers to enrich my tourist experience. Two other reliability checks confirmed the reliability of the two subscales (respectively Cronbach's α = .73; Cronbach's α = .80). In the end, the entire scale was combined into a single variable: travel planning behaviors. 

Table 3. 7
Factor and reliability test for travel planning behavior scale (N = 134)

ItemNeedInfoEvaluationPurchaseIn my opinion, pictures like the ones I just saw...Inspire me to travel .85Make me seriously consider to go on a vacation even though I had no intention before .82Help me find travel information when I need it .73Reduce my effort to find travel information .87Increase the quality of travel information.61Help me evaluate/compare travel destinations/services/suppliers .53Lead me to expand my consideration set.74Help me to reconfirm my travel selections.77Help me to book travel services/suppliers.56Influence what to do/see at destinations.70Help me purchase complementary destinations/services/suppliers to enrich my tourist experience
.87R2
Cronbach's α.16
.74.18
.72.21
.73.18
.8076.5 
76.6 3.5. Validity & Reliability 
76.6.1 3.5.1. Pre-testing 
      Validity can be described as the extent to which a concept is accurately measured in a quantitative study (Heale & Twycross, 2015), In general, there are two main types of validity: (1) internal validity and (2) external validity. While the former type of validity refers to the structure of a study and its variables, the latter type of validity refers to how generalizable the results of the study are (Neuman, 2014). Attention was paid to both of these notions during the conceptualisation of this online experimental survey. 
      One way in which this study increased the internal validity of its measurements was by incorporating the feedback of respondents who pre-tested the online experimental survey (Ruel et al., 2019). In general, pre-testing can be described as the stage in between finalizing the design of the survey and collecting actual data. In this particular stage, the survey is tested by a representative and diverse subsample of respondents and critically assessed. According to Ruel et al. (2019), researchers are highly recommended to pre-test their surveys, as failing to do so can lead to invalid results. Besides, pre-tests provide researchers with an accurate estimation of the time that it takes to complete the survey. Overall, when pre-testing surveys, researchers should carefully examine the comprehensibility and unambiguity of the questions, the order of the questions, and - if necessary - the clarity of the experimental stimuli (Neuman, 2014; Reul et al., 2019). 
      In total, a subsample of N = 7 respondents pre-tested the questionnaire of this particular investigation. Through short interviews with the respondents afterwards, the researcher gained in-depth understanding of their experience with the different questions and experimental stimuli (Neuman, 2014). Based on the respondents' feedback, a number of changes had to be made to the survey. One of these changes included a more detailed description of the content creator and a change in the overall structure of the survey. To avoid the word source throughout the questions and statements (e.g. in my opinion, the source can be described as...), the researcher created three different survey branches; one for each type of content. Instead of the word source, each branch now used the label of the respective content creator. All respondents who were assigned to condition 1, for instance, followed a personalised branch of the survey and encountered statements like 'in my opinion, this travel influencer can be described as ...'. 
      
76.6.2 3.5.2. Manipulation Checks
      Another way in which this investigation verified the internal validity of its measurements was by including two manipulation checks. According to Hoewe (2017), manipulation checks are important as they check if the respondents perceived the experimental manipulations as intended. At first, respondents in the first three conditions of this investigation were asked to indicate whether they thought the content they had seen contained sponsored elements ('do you agree or disagree that the pictures you just saw contain sponsored elements?'). This specific question is formulated by Boerman et al. (2012) and consists of two different answer options: (1) agree and (2) disagree. Secondly, the same respondents were asked to recall the creator of the content they had seen: (1) a travel influencer or (2) a travel agency. By using the computer program IBM SPSS, the researcher was able to see how the respondents answered these specific questions. 
	In terms of source recognition, most respondents were able to recall the creator of the content they got exposed to. In condition 1, 94.1% of the respondents (N = 32) was able to remember that the content they had seen was made by a travel influencer. In condition 2, this percentage was even higher, namely 97.0% (N = 32). When it came to condition 3, 90.9% of the respondents (N = 30) was able to remember that the content they got exposed to was made by a travel agency. Overall, these findings are in line with the intended manipulations. 
	In terms of advertisement recognition, however, not all respondents were able to recall the nature of the content. As intended, 94.1% of the respondents in condition 1 (N = 32) was able to recognize that the content they had seen contained sponsored elements. Nevertheless, 78.8% of the respondents in condition 2 (N = 26) also thought that the content they got exposed to included advertising. This finding is interesting and not in line with the intended manipulation, as the content in condition 2 was non-sponsored. Besides, 81.8% of the respondents in condition 3 (N = 27) thought that the content they had seen contained sponsored elements as well. This finding is also not in line with the intended manipulation, as the content in condition 3 was again non-sponsored. All in all, it can be concluded that 50% of the manipulation was perceived as intended by the respondents. The discussion part of this thesis further elaborates on the consequences and possible causes of this finding (see page 48). 

76.7 3.6. Data Analysis 
      To analyse the data of the online experimental survey, the computer program IBM SPSS was used. In order to test whether type of content had an influence on the respondents' perceived source credibility, travel planning behaviors and destination choices (= hypothesis 1), this study conducted multiple one-way between-group analyses of variance (ANOVA). These tests were chosen because they enabled the researcher to efficiently compare the mean scores of the different conditions in this study (Pallant, 2016).
      Furthermore, in order to test the mediation effect of perceived source credibility (= hypotheses 2), this study conducted two mediation analyses by using model 4 of Hayes' PROCESS Macro test (Hayes, 2009), with 5.000 bootstrapped samples. These mediation analyses conducted multiple regression analyses at once, which provided the researcher with a systematic overview of all direct and indirect effects of the independent variable type of content on the dependent variables travel planning behaviors and destination choices. By creating a dummy variable for the independent variable type of content, the researcher was able to conduct the mediation analyses with a multicategorical independent variable.  
      Thirdly, a multiple regression analysis with perceived source credibility as criterion was conducted to test the extent to which the variable advertisement recognition moderated the effect of type of content on perceived source credibility.  In general, multiple regression analysis is based on correlation, and thus allows a more sophisticated exploration of the interrelationship among a set of variables (Pallant, 2016). 


77 4. Results

      As aforementioned, the computer program IBM SPSS is used to gain insights into the validity of the four hypotheses of this study. The different analyses conducted by the researcher are five one-way between-groups analyses of variance (ANOVA), two PROCESS Macro mediation analyses and four regression analysis. In the following sections of this chapter, the results of the analyses are reported and explained.   

77.1 4.1. The Influence of Type of Content
77.1.1 4.1.1. The Relationship between Type of Content and Source Credibility 
      This particular research expects to find that young adults perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as more credible than Instagram content made by travel agencies. In order to test this hypothesis, a one-way between-groups ANOVA is conducted in the computer program IBM SPSS. By using the Tukey HSD test, post-hoc comparisons are made between the conditions of the predictor variable type of content. To clarify, the conditions that are entered into the analysis are: condition 1 (sponsored Instagram content made by a travel influencer), condition 2 (non-sponsored Instagram content made by a travel influencer) condition 3 (Instagram content made by a travel agency) and condition 4 (anonymous Instagram travel content). According to a preliminary analysis, the homogeneity of variance assumption is not violated. 
      As determined by the one-way between-groups ANOVA, there is a statistically significant relationship between type of content and young adults' perceived source credibility, F (3, 129) = 4.50, p = .005. Post-hoc comparisons from the Tukey HSD test indicate that two conditions significantly differ from each other when it comes to their source credibility scores, namely sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers (M = 4.41, SD = 1.10) and Instagram content made by travel agencies (M = 5.22, SD = .84), p = .003. From the significantly different means can be concluded that young adults generally perceive Instagram content made by travel agencies as more credible than sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers. This finding is in contradiction to the expectation of the researcher, which means that hypothesis 1a cannot be confirmed. 
      It is important to mention, however, that this statistically significant difference is only present when the Instagram content made by travel influencers contains sponsored elements. Namely, the same results show that there is no statistical significant difference between young adults' perception of non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers (M = 4.64, SD = .88) and young adults' perception of Instagram content made by travel agencies (M = 5.22, SD = .84). Again, this finding is not in line with the expectation of the researcher, which means that hypothesis 1a cannot be confirmed. 
      To get an in-depth understanding of these contradictory findings, the researcher conducts two more one-way between-groups ANOVAS; one to test the outcome variable expertise and one to test the outcome variable trustworthiness (these outcome variables both make up the scale source credibility). The first analysis, which treats expertise as the outcome variable, shows that there is a statistically significant relationship between type of content and young adults' perceived expertise, F (3, 130) = 5.08, p = .002. Post-hoc comparisons from the Tukey HSD test indicate that one of the conditions significantly differs from two other conditions when it comes to its expertise scores. To be precise, young adults' perception of sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers (M = 4.68, SD = 1.07) significantly differs from young adults' perception of Instagram content made by travel agencies (M = 5.56, SD = .91, p = .003) and young adults' perception of anonymous Instagram travel content (M = 5.38, SD = 1.00, p = .029). From the means found in this analysis can be concluded that young adults generally perceive Instagram content made by travel agencies and/or anonymous sources as more informed than sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers. Nevertheless, this is again only the case when the Instagram content made by travel influencers contains sponsored elements. The same post-hoc comparisons show that, when it comes to expertise, there is no statistically significant difference between young adults' perception of non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers (M = 4.98, SD = 1.08) and young adults' perception of Instagram content made by travel agencies (M = 5.56, SD = .91). 
      The second analysis, which treats trustworthiness as the outcome variable, reveals that there is also a statistically significant relationship between type of content and young adults' perceived trustworthiness, F (3,129) = 2.77, p = .045. New post-hoc comparisons from the Tukey HSD test indicate that two conditions significantly differ from each other when it comes to their trustworthiness scores, namely sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers (M = 4.15, SD = 1.43) and Instagram content made by travel agencies (M = 4.87, SD = .99), p = .049. From the significant different means can be concluded that young adults generally perceive Instagram content made by travel agencies as more trustworthy than sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers. Once again, it is important to mention that this conclusion can only be made when the Instagram content made by travel influencers contains sponsored elements. This is because the same post-hoc comparisons show that, when it comes to trustworthiness, there is no statistically significant difference between young adults' perception of non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers (M = 4.30, SD = 1.02) and young adults' perception of Instagram content made by travel agencies (M = 4.87, SD = .99). 

77.1.2 4.1.2. The Relationship between Type of Content, Travel Planning Behavior & Destination Choices
      The current study also expects to find that young adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies in their travel planning behaviors and destination choices (= hypotheses 1b and 1c). By conducting two new one-way between-groups ANOVAS, these hypotheses are examined. Again, post-hoc comparisons using the Tukey HSD test are made between the conditions of the predictor variable type of content. To clarify once more, the conditions that are entered into the analyses are: condition 1 (sponsored Instagram content made by a travel influencer), condition 2 (non-sponsored Instagram content made by a travel influencer) condition 3 (Instagram content made by a travel agency) and condition 4 (anonymous Instagram travel content). It is important to mention that the homogeneity of variance assumptions are not violated according to the results of preliminary analyses. 
      From the first one-way between-groups ANOVA, which considers travel planning behavior as the outcome variable, can be concluded that there is no statistically significant relationship between type of content and young adults' travel planning behaviors, F (3, 130) = 1.55, p = .205. As determined by the post-hoc comparisons of the Tukey HSD test, no conditions significantly differ from each other when it comes to their travel planning behavior scores. The means of the different conditions are: M = 2.95 for sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers (SD = .71), M = 3.14 for non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers (SD = .73), M = 3.28 for Instagram content made by travel agencies (SD = .50), and M = 3.24 for anonymous Instagram travel content (SD = .78). In contradiction to the expectation of the researcher, this finding suggests that young adults do not prefer to use Instagram content made by travel influencers over Instagram content made by travel agencies in their travel planning behaviors. Because this suggestion is not in line with the researcher's assumption, hypothesis 1b cannot be confirmed. 
      From the second one-way between-groups ANOVA, which considers destination choices as the outcome variable, can be concluded that there is also no statistically significant relationship between type of content and young adults' destination choices, F (3, 130) = 1.84, p = .144. According to the post-hoc comparisons of the Tukey HSD test, no conditions significantly differ from each other when it comes to their destination choices scores. Respectively, the means of the different conditions are: M = 3.47 for sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers (SD = .79), M = 3.62 for non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers (SD = .87), M = 3.76 for Instagram content made by travel agencies (SD = .85), and M = 3.91 for anonymous Instagram travel content (SD = .73). Again, this finding is in contradiction to what the researcher expects to find, as it suggests that young adults do not prefer to use (sponsored) Instagram content made by travel influencers over Instagram content made by travel agencies when making travel destination choices. In order to accept this suggestion, the researcher has to reject hypothesis 1c. 

77.2 4.2. The Mediating Effect of Source Credibility
77.2.1 4.2.1. The Relationship between Type of Content, Source Credibility & Travel Planning Behaviors
      In order to test whether source credibility mediates the effect of type of content on young adults' travel planning behaviors, a mediation analysis is conducted by using model 4 of Hayes' PROCESS Macro in IBM SPSS. During the analysis, the corresponding dummy coded variable of type of content serves as the predictor variable (0 = anonymous Instagram travel content, 1 = Instagram content made by travel influencers, 2 = Instagram content made by travel agencies). Furthermore, travel planning behaviors serves as the outcome variable and source credibility serves as the mediating variable. It is important to mention that the analysis is conducted with 5.000 bootstrapped samples.
      The first part of the output shows that no statistically significant relationships can be reported between the different types of content and young adults' perceived source credibility. While the overall model reveals to be significant (F (2, 130) = 6.26, p = .003, R2 = .09), the distinct effects of the different types of content on source credibility reveal not to be significant. To be precise, neither the distinct effect of Instagram content made by travel influencers on source credibility is significant, a1 = -.28, t (133) = -1.45, p = .149, nor the distinct effect of Instagram content made by travel agencies on source credibility, a2 = .41, t (133) = 1.82, p = .070. It must be highlighted that the coefficients stated in these results refer to the effects of the different types of content when compared to the control condition as a reference category (= anonymous Instagram travel content). 
      However, the second part of the output shows that there is a statistically significant relationship between young adults' perceived source credibility and their travel planning behaviors, b1 = .35, t (133) = 6.02, p < .001. The corresponding regression analysis, in which travel planning behaviors is treated as the outcome variable, shows that the overall model is significant, F (3, 129) = 13.53, p < .001, R2 = .24. The distinct direct effects of the different types of content on travel planning behaviors are, nonetheless, insignificant (respectively c1 = -.10, t (133) = -.78, p = .437; c2 = -.11, t (133) = -.70, p = .483). This means that, as also described in detail in section 4.1.2, young adults are not more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies in their travel planning behaviors. Still, as aforementioned, the output does reveal a statistically significant effect of perceived source credibility on young adults' travel planning behaviors. From this finding, the researcher can conclude that young adults are more likely to use Instagram travel content in their travel planning behaviors when they perceive the source(s) of the content as credible. This is in line with the expectation of the researcher, which means that hypothesis 2a can be confirmed. 
      To determine the occurrence of a mediation effect, the researcher looks at the final part of the PROCESS Macro output. This part of the output provides information about the existence of indirect and conditional effects of the different types of content on young adults' travel planning behaviors. According to the first part of this output, perceived source credibility does not mediate the effect of Instagram content made by travel influencers on travel planning behaviors, index1 = -.10, SE = .07, 95% CI [-.26; .03]. The indices stated in these results are not significant because zero (the null) falls between the lower and upper bound of the 95% confidence interval. According to the second part of this output, however, perceived source credibility does indeed mediate the effect of Instagram content made by travel agencies on travel planning behaviors, index2 = .14, SE = .07, 95% CI [.00; .29]. The indices stated in these results reveal to be significant because the 95% confidence interval does not encompass zero (the null). 
      Still, these findings do not allow the researcher to confirm hypothesis 3a. Although the results of the PROCESS Macro demonstrate the existence of a mediator, they don't support the study's expectation. From the results found can be concluded that only the relationship between Instagram content made by travel agencies and travel planning behaviors is mediated by perceived source credibility. To be precise, this means that only when young adults perceive Instagram content made by travel agencies as credible, they are more likely to use it in their travel planning behaviors (and vice versa). Contradictory, when it comes to young adults' decisions to use Instagram content made by travel influencers in their travel planning behaviors, perceived source credibility has no influence.


Figure 4. 1
Mediation of source credibility (1)



77.2.2 4.2.2. The Relationship between Type of Content, Source Credibility & Destination Choices
      Another mediation analysis using model 4 of Hayes' PROCESS Macro is conducted to test hypothesis H3b. This particular hypothesis states that source credibility mediates the effect of type of content on young adults' destination choices. Again, during the analysis, the dummy coded variable of type of content serves as the predictor variable (0 = anonymous Instagram travel content, 1 = Instagram content made by travel influencers, 2 = Instagram content made by travel agencies) and source credibility as the mediating variable. This time, however, it is destination choices that serves as the outcome variable. It is important to mention that this test is also conducted with 5.000 bootstrapped samples. 
      The first part of the output shows, again, that the relationships between the different types of content and young adults' perceived source credibility are insignificant. Because these results fully correspond to (a part of) the results of the previous PROCESS Macro test, they are not described in detail in this section. The second part of the output shows the effects of the predictor - and the mediating variable on young adults' destination choices. From the corresponding regression analysis, in which destination choices is treated as the outcome variable, can be concluded that the overall model is significant, F (3, 129) = 13.18, p < .001, R2 = .24. The distinct direct effects of the different types of content on young adults' destination choices, however, are not significant (respectively c1 = -.25, t (133) = -1.64, p = .103; c2 = -.32, t (133) = -1.77, p = .079). This means that, as also described in detail in section 4.1.2, young adults are not more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies when choosing travel destinations. In contrast, the distinct effect of perceived source credibility on young adults' destination choices does reveal to be significant, b2 = .40, t (133) = 5.79, p < .001. From this finding, the researcher can conclude that young adults are more likely to use Instagram travel content in their travel destinations choices when they perceive the source(s) of the content as credible. Because this is in line with the expectation of the researcher, hypothesis 2b can be confirmed.  
      Once again, to determine the occurrence of a mediation effect, the researcher looks at the final part of the PROCESS Macro output. In this case, this part of the output provides information about the existence of indirect and conditional effects of the different types of content on young adults' destination choices. However, while the previous PROCESS model revealed some kind of mediation, this PROCESS model does not. According to the first part of the output, perceived source credibility does not mediate the effect of Instagram content made by travel influencers on destination choices, index1 = -.11, SE = .08, 95% CI [-.27; .04]. The indices stated in these results are not significant because zero (the null) falls between the lower and upper bound of the 95% confidence interval. The second part of the output, furthermore, shows that perceived source credibility also does not mediate the effect of Instagram content made by travel agencies on destination choices, index2 = .16, SE = .09, 95% CI [-.00; .35]. Equivalently, the indices stated in these results are insignificant because the 95% confidence interval encompasses zero (the null). 
      In reaction to these findings, the researcher cannot confirm hypothesis 3b. The results of the PROCESS Macro test clearly demonstrate the absence of a mediator. Although perceived source credibility does have a significant effect on destination choices, it does not have a significant indirect effect on the relationship between type of content and the aforementioned outcome variable. To be precise, this means that young adults are not more likely to use Instagram travel content (both made by travel influencers and travel agencies) in their destination choices when they find the source(s) of the content credible. Possible explanations for this finding are highlighted in the discussion part of this thesis (see page 48). 








Figure 4. 2
Mediation of source credibility (2)
      


77.3 4.3. The Moderating Effect of Advertisement Recognition
	And last, but not least, this study expects to find that young adults' ability to recognize advertisements moderates the relationship between the predictor variable type of content and the outcome variable source credibility. To be precise, young adults are expected to perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as more credible, but this effect is weaker when they recognize that the content contains sponsored elements. 
	According to the results of the very first one-way between-groups ANOVA (see page 36) there is a statistically significant difference between young adults' perception of sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers (M = 4.41, SD = 1.10) and young adults' perception of Instagram content made by travel agencies (M = 5.22, SD = .84), F (3, 129) = 4.50, p = .005. From the significantly different means can be concluded that young adults generally perceive Instagram content made by travel agencies as more credible than sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers. As aforementioned, however, this conclusion can only be made when the so-called Instagram content made by travel influencers contains sponsored elements. Namely, the results of the same one-way between-groups ANOVA also show that there is no statistically significant difference between young adults' perception of non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers (M = 4.64, SD = .88, N = 32) and young adults' perception of Instagram content made by travel agencies (M = 5.22, SD = .84, N = 33). 
	When solely looking at these findings, the researcher can conclude that there is some kind of moderation effect. Young adults perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as less credible than Instagram content made by travel agencies, but only if the Instagram content made by travel influencers contains advertising. Whenever the Instagram content made by travel influencers does not contain advertising, young adults do not perceive it differently than Instagram content made by travel agencies. Still, this finding does not allow the researcher to confirm hypothesis 4. Even though the results show that sponsored label moderates the effect of type of content on source credibility, they are not in line with the researcher's expectation. From the results of the one-way between-groups ANOVA can be concluded that young adults perceive Instagram content made by travel agencies are more credible than (sponsored) Instagram content made by travel influencers, while actually the researcher expected the reserve. 
      In order to double check the presence of a moderation effect, nevertheless, this study also conducts a multiple linear regression analysis with source credibility as criterion. For the first predictor variable in this regression, type of content, the researcher uses a dummy coded variable with the values: 0 = anonymous Instagram travel content, 1 = Instagram content made by travel influencers (both sponsored and non-sponsored), and 3 = Instagram content made by travel agencies. For the second predictor variable in the regression, sponsored label, the researcher uses another dummy coded variable with the values: 0 = non-sponsored, 1 = sponsored. It is important to mention that sponsored label is used instead of advertising recognition, since most respondents in this study were unable to properly recall the nature of the Instagram content (either sponsored or non-sponsored). 
	According to the output of preliminary analyses, the researcher does not violate the assumptions of multicollinearity, normality, linearity, and homoscedasticity. Inspection of the correlations matrix reveals that the predictor variables type of content and advertisement recognition show at least some relationship with the outcome variable source credibility. Besides, the correlation between each of the predictor variables is not too high. Furthermore, from the coefficients table can be concluded that there is no indication of multicollinearity. The VIF (Variance Inflation Factor) value is well below the cut-off of 10 (1.39) and the Tolerance value is not less than .10 (.71). The Normal P-P Plot, which is presented at the end of the output, does not suggest major deviations from normality. 
      The output of the multiple regression analysis further shows that only 5.0% of the variance in the outcome variable source credibility is explained by the model (which includes the predictor variables type of content and sponsored label), F (2, 130) = 3.44, p = .035. According to the results of the regression analysis, type of content does not make a significant unique contribution to the prediction of source credibility (β = -.18, p = .078), nor does sponsored label (β = -.07, p = .487). In general, from these findings can be concluded that there is no moderation effect present. The results clearly show that both predictor variables (type of content and sponsored label) are not correlated with the outcome variable source credibility. Surprisingly, this is in contradiction to what is found by the one-way between-groups ANOVA. 
      
77.4 4.4. The Influence of the Control Variables
      There is a possibility that demographic characteristics such as age, gender and level of education have influenced the answers given by the respondents. In order to test this, the researcher conducts a few more multiple linear regression analyses in IBM SPSS. Preliminary analyses are performed to ensure that no assumptions of multicollinearity, normality, linearity, and homoscedasticity are violated. The analyses also account for type of content by including the corresponding dummy coded variable as one of the predictor variables in the regressions (0 = anonymous Instagram travel content, 1 = Instagram content made by travel influencers (both sponsored and non-sponsored), and 3 = Instagram content made by travel agencies).
      Two multiple linear regression analyses are conducted by the researcher in order to test the potential effects of age on young adults' travel planning behaviors and destination choices. The results of the regression analyses show that both models are insignificant, with F (2, 131) = 2.25, p = .109, R2 = .03 for the outcome variable travel planning behavior and F (2, 131) = 2.72, p = .070, R2 = .04 for the outcome variable destination choices. This means that age did not make a significant unique contribution to the prediction of the dependent variable travel planning behavior (β = -1.24, p = .154), nor to the prediction of the dependent variable destination choices (β = -.06, p = .478). Based on these findings, the researcher can conclude that age did not influence the answers given by the respondents. 
      Two more multiple linear regression analyses are carried out in this study to test whether gender has an effect on young adults' travel planning behaviors and destination choices. Because gender is a categorical variable, the researcher uses a corresponding dummy coded variable as one of the predictor variables in the regressions (0 = male, 1 = female). According to the results of the regression analyses, respondents' gender did not influence their answers given during the experimental survey. Both models reveal not to be significant, with F (2,131) = 1.39, p = .253, R2 = .02 for the outcome variable travel planning behavior and F (2,131) = 2.80, p = .064, R2 = .041 for the outcome variable destination choices. Just like age, gender did not make a significant unique contribution to the prediction of the dependent variable travel planning behavior (β = .05, p = .547), nor to the prediction of the dependent variable destination choices (β = .07, p = .416). In general, from this finding can be concluded that males and females do not perceive travel content on Instagram differently.
      And last, but not least, the researcher conducts two more multiple linear regression analyses to check whether the respondents' levels of education had an effect on their travel planning behaviors and destination choices. Again, because level of education originally serves as a categorical variable, the researcher uses a dummy coded variable of level of education as one of the predictor variables in the regressions (0 = low level of education, 1 = high level of education). From the results of the last regression analyses, the researcher can conclude that the answers given by the respondents were not influenced by their levels of education. Repeatedly, both models reveal to be insignificant, with F (2, 129) = 2.12, p = .124, R2 = .03 for the outcome variable travel planning behavior and F (2, 129) = 2.66, p = .074, R2 = .04 for the outcome variable destination choices. This means that level of education did not make a significant unique contribution to the prediction of the dependent variable travel planning behavior (β = -.12, p = .178), nor to the prediction of the dependent variable destination choices (β = -.06, p = .498). 

77.5 4.5. Hypotheses & Results

Table 4. 1
Hypotheses: confirmed or not confirmed?
NumberHypothesisResultH1aYoung adults perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as more credible than Instagram content made by travel agencies.Not confirmedH1bYoung adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies in their travel planning behavior. Not confirmedH1cYoung adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers than Instagram content made by travel agencies to choose travel destinations. Not confirmedH2aYoung adults are more likely to use Instagram content in their travel planning behavior when they perceive the source(s) of the content as credible. ConfirmedH2bYoung adults are more likely to use Instagram content in their travel destination choices when they perceive the source(s) of the content as credible.ConfirmedH3aYoung adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers in their travel planning behaviors, however, this effect is mediated by their perceived source credibility.Not confirmedH3bYoung adults are more likely to use Instagram content made by travel influencers to choose travel destinations, however, this effect is mediated by their perceived source credibility.Not confirmedH4Young adults perceive Instagram content made by travel influencers as more credible, however, this effect is weaker when they recognize that the content contains sponsored elements.Not confirmed
      


78 5. Conclusion & Discussion

78.1 5.1. Discussion 
78.1.1 5.1.1. Summary of Results
      The outcomes of this study can be summarized as follows. According to the results of the first one-way between-groups ANOVA, there is a statistically significant difference between young adults' perception of Instagram content made by travel influencers and young adults' perception of Instagram content made by travel agencies. In contradiction to the researcher's expectation, it appears that young adults generally perceive Instagram travel content made by travel agencies as more credible than Instagram travel content made by travel influencers. It is important to mention, however, that this is only the case when the Instagram travel content made by travel influencers contains sponsored elements. When the Instagram travel content made by travel influencers does not contain sponsored elements, young adults do not perceive it differently than Instagram travel content made by travel agencies.  
	Nevertheless, it must be highlighted that the aforementioned findings do not suggest that sponsored travel content made by travel influencers is not credible. The results of the analysis show that all types of Instagram travel content (either anonymous, made by travel influencers or made by travel agencies) are perceived as credible, however, the one as slightly more than the other. To clarify, this conclusion can be made when looking at the source credibility means of the different conditions. Because all conditions had a source credibility mean of higher than M = 4 (the mid-point), the researcher can conclude that no types of Instagram travel content are perceived as incredible; not even travel content made by anonymous sources. For a systematic overview of the mean scores of the different conditions, please look at tables 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3.
	The aforementioned findings are in line with findings from previous studies, but only to a certain extent. Just like previous research (e.g. Litvin et al., 2007), this study has found that Instagram travel posts made by travel influencers are credible sources of travel information. Young adults generally identify the aforementioned Instagram content as both informed and trustworthy. However, this study has also found that Instagram travel posts made by travel agencies are even more credible sources of travel information. According to the results of multiple one-way between-groups ANOVAS, young adults perceive Instagram travel posts made by travel agencies as more informed and trustworthy than Instagram travel posts made by travel influencers. Particularly, this last finding contradicts to what is said in previous studies. Influential scholars such as Ye et al. (2011) stated that tourists perceive content created by fellow travelers as more objective, up-to-date and enjoyable than information created by commercial sources such travel agencies. 
Table 5. 1
Source Credibility Means (7-Point Semantic Differential Scale)
Source CredibilityLowMediumHighM = 1.00 - 2.99M = 3.00 - 4.99M = 5.00 - 7.00 Sponsored SMI4.41Non-sponsored SMI4.64Travel agency5.22Anonymous4.81 
Table 5. 2
Expertise Means (7-Point Semantic Differential Scale)
ExpertiseLowMediumHighM = 1.00 - 2.99M = 3.00 - 4.99M = 5.00 - 7.00Sponsored SMI4.68Non-sponsored SMI4.98Travel agency5.56Anonymous5.38 
Table 5. 3
Trustworthiness Means (7-Point Semantic Differential Scale)
TrustworthinessLowMediumHighM = 1.00 - 2.99M = 3.00 - 4.99M = 5.00 - 7.00Sponsored SMI4.15Non-sponsored SMI4.30Travel agency4.87Anonymous4.24 
      The results of this study further indicate statistically insignificant effects of type of content on young adults' travel planning behaviors and destination choices. Whether the respondents got exposed to Instagram travel content made by the travel influencer Jack Morris or Instagram travel content made by the travel agency Booking.com, their travel planning behaviors - and destination choices scores did not significantly differ. From these findings, it can be concluded that young adults do not prefer to use Instagram travel content made by travel influencers over Instagram travel content made by travel agencies when planning (international) trips or when choosing travel destinations. This is especially interesting because the aforementioned findings indicate that young adults perceive travel content made by travel agencies as generally more informed and trustworthy.   
      Again, the current findings do not suggest that young adults never use Instagram travel posts in their travel planning behaviors and destination choices. As shown in table 5.4, three out of the four conditions had travel planning behaviors means of higher than M = 3 (the mid-point). Only the mean of the first condition, sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers, was slightly lower. This means that young adults do use non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers and travel agencies in their travel planning behaviors. Furthermore, as table 5.5. shows, four out of the four conditions had a destination choices mean of higher than M = 3. From this can be concluded that young adults use all types of Instagram content (either sponsored or non-sponsored) in their destination choices.    

Table 5. 4
Travel Planning Behavior Means (5-Point Likert Scale)
Travel Planning BehaviorLowMediumHighM = 1.00 - 2.33M = 2.34 - 3.67M = 3.68 - 5.00Sponsored SMI2.95Non-sponsored SMI3.14Travel agency3.28Anonymous3.24 
Table 5. 5
Destination Choices Means (5-Point Likert Scale)
Destination ChoicesLowMediumHighM = 1.00 - 2.33M = 2.34 - 3.67M = 3.68 - 5.00Sponsored SMI3.47Non-sponsored SMI3.62Travel agency3.76Anonymous3.91
      Furthermore, previous research discovered that whenever consumers are exposed to persuasive messages made by marketers or influencers, their perceived source credibility affects their attitudes and behavioral intentions (e.g. Hovland et al., 1953). In reaction to this discovery, this particular study hypothesized that perceived source credibility mediates the relationship between type of content and young adults' travel planning behaviors. However, according to the results of one of the PROCESS Macro tests, source credibility only partly mediates the relationship between type of content and young adults' travel planning behaviors. Only in the case of Instagram content made by travel agencies, perceived source credibility has an influence (compared to the control condition). This means that whenever young adults perceive Instagram content made by travel agencies as credible, they are more likely to use it in their travel planning behaviors. In the case of Instagram content made by travel influencers, in contrast, perceived source credibility turned out not to have an influence. Overall, this finding is not in line with findings from previous research (e.g. Hovland et al., 1953), which means that the role of source credibility has changed.   
      In reaction to the aforementioned discovery, this particular study also hypothesized that perceived source credibility mediates the relationship between type of content and young adults' destination choices. Nevertheless, the results of another PROCESS Macro test showed that perceived source credibility does not explain the relationships between the different types of content and young adults' destination choices; not even partly. Again, this finding is not in line with findings from previous research (e.g. Hovland et al., 1953), which means that the role of source credibility has changed.
      And last, but not least, the results of this particular study indicated that sponsored label moderates the effect of the different types of content on young adults' perceived source credibility. From the very first one-way between-groups ANOVA can be concluded that respondents perceived the Instagram posts made by the travel agency Booking.com as more credible than the Instagram posts made by the travel influencer Jack Morris. However, this difference in perception was only present when the Instagram posts made by the travel influencer Jack Morris contained sponsored elements. When the Instagram posts made by the travel influencer Jack Morris did not contain sponsored elements, respondents did not perceive it differently than the Instagram posts made by the travel agency Booking.com. 
      
78.1.2 5.1.2. Skepticism as Possible Explanation 
	In the last couple of years, advertisers have faced a multitude of challenges when it comes to targeting consumers (Childers et al., 2019). Examples of these challenges are the rise of Social Networking Sites, the introduction of algorithms and the phenomenon of information overload. In response to these challenges, advertisers have turned to social media based influencer marketing (Phua et al., 2017). With the use of social media influencers, marketers nowadays try to influence consumers in more indirect and subtle ways. According to The Interactive Advertising Bureau (2018), social media influencers not only have the potential to create engagement and to drive conversations, but also to provide connectivity between their followers and certain brands. However, while social media influencers have been effective advertisers for a long time, they are now slowly losing their credibility. 
      Potentially, one of the reasons why social media influencers are slowly losing their credibility is because of growing skepticism among consumers. This skepticism is a result of the increasing transparency of the way in which social media influencers make money. As aforementioned, social media influencers have recently been obliged to fully disclose sponsored collaborations between them and companies or brands (Lee & Kim, 2020). Regulators and advertisers have developed this social media advertising guideline to protect consumers from being misled by commercial content on social media (Cain, 2011). In general, the principal task of sponsorship disclosures is to notify consumers that a particular message contains persuasive intentions and to thereby provoke consumers' previously acquired persuasion knowledge (Boerman et al., 2017). According to Van Noort et al. (2012), sponsorship disclosures are especially important because consumers are less likely to recognize persuasive intentions in non-traditional advertisements than in traditional advertisements. Overall, sponsorships disclosures increase consumers' understanding that user-generated content can be advertising and that a company may have paid the corresponding content creator for promoting a certain product (Boerman et al., 2015). 
      According to the persuasion knowledge model of Friestad and Wright (1994), consumers develop persuasion knowledge throughout their entire life and use this knowledge when they are exposed to persuasion attempts from advertisements or sales messages. Whenever consumers realize that a particular message has a persuasive intention (e.g. when it tries to convince them to acquire something), they start using their persuasion knowledge to either accept or resist it (Friestad & Wright, 1994). As stated by influential scholars such as Petty and Cacioppo (1997), and Wei et al. (2008), consumers are more likely to resist a persuasive message when they recognize it as such. Overall, this is because they want to maintain their freedom of choice and to avoid a feeling of being manipulated (Brehm & Brehm, 1981). 
      According to Lee and Koo (2012), and Lee and Ahn (2013), consumers' suspicions towards the credibility of a source are raised when they know or feel that a message has other intentions than providing authentic consumer experiences and recommendations. Particularly in situations when consumers are not familiar with the creator of a product/service recommendation, their perceived source credibility perceptions are formed based on message characteristics such as sponsorship disclosures (Hwang & Jeong, 2016). In this study, the sponsored Instagram posts made by the travel influencer Jack Morris contained explicit sponsorship disclosures (they stated "sponsored content"). These disclosures most likely activated the respondents' persuasion knowledge (i.e. the respondents' understanding that the post enclosed sponsored elements) and affected the way in which they reacted to the content. It showed that only 23.8% of the respondents was familiar with the travel influencer Jack Morris at the time of the investigation. From this finding, the researcher can assume that the respondents mainly formed their source credibility perceptions based on the sponsorship disclosures and acted accordingly with increasing skepticism. 
      In order to attenuate the increase of consumers' skepticism, travel influencers (or social media influencers in general) are advised to implement impartiality disclosure (Stubb & Colliander (2019). While sponsorship disclosure refers to explicitly stating that certain content is sponsored, impartiality disclosure refers to explicitly stating that certain content is not sponsored. According to a study conducted by Stubb and Colliander (2019), impartiality disclosure is necessary to prevent that consumers suspect sponsorship when actually the influencer promotes a product or service without sponsorship. The authors state that impartiality product posts relatively generate higher source and message credibility, as they are less likely to be perceived as advertising in comparison to sponsored product posts or posts without sponsorship information.    

78.2 5.2. Conclusion
78.2.1 5.2.1. Overall Conclusion
      The general aim of this study was to increase one's understanding of how Instagram travel content influences young adults' travel planning behaviors and destination choices. By conducting an online between-subjects experimental survey with four conditions, the researcher examined the following research question: To what extent does travel content on Instagram (made by travel influencers vs. travel agencies) influence young adults' travel planning behavior and destination choices? The sample of the online experimental survey consisted of 134 respondents between the age of 18 and 24 and was recruited through online snowball sampling. Multiple statistical analyses in IBM SPSS, including Hayes' PROCESS Macro, were conducted to interpret the results of the experimental survey. While type of content served as a between-subjects variable in this research (4 types: sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers, non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers, Instagram content made by travel agencies, and anonymous Instagram content), advertisement recognition served as a moderating variable. Furthermore, perceived source credibility served as the mediating variable in this research. 
      In conclusion, it can be stated that the differences between the influence of Instagram content made by travel influencers and the influence of Instagram content made by travel agencies are small. Young adults do perceive Instagram content made by travel agencies as more credible than Instagram content made by travel influencers, however, this is only the case when the latter type of Instagram content contains sponsored elements. Besides, even though this difference in perception is present, young adults don't prefer one type of Instagram content over another when it comes to using it in their travel planning behaviors and destination choices. Furthermore, perceived source credibility only influences young adults' decisions to use Instagram content made by travel agencies in their travel planning behaviors. Whenever young adults perceive Instagram content made by travel agencies as credible, they are more likely to use it in their travel planning behaviors, and vice versa. Contradictory, when it comes to young adults' decisions to use Instagram content made by travel influencers in their travel planning behaviors, perceived source credibility does not have an influence. The same applies for young adults' decisions to use Instagram content made by travel agencies in their destination choices, and young adults' decisions to use Instagram content made by travel influencers in their destination choices. 
      
78.2.2 5.2.2. Implications
      The results of this study offer valuable insights into the impact of Instagram travel content on young adults' perceived source credibility, travel planning behaviors and destination choices. Since the results of this study are expected to be generalizable, it is important to discuss their implications. As aforementioned, young adults become increasingly aware of travel influencers' advertising attempts on social media platforms like Instagram. They know and feel when travel influencers get paid by companies to recommend certain products or services to their followers (through sponsorship disclosures) and act accordingly with increasing skepticism. As the results of this study show, this skepticism leads to the fact that young adults perceive Instagram content made by brands themselves (in this case: travel agencies) as more credible than sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers. However, it is important to mention that this phenomenon does not yet lead to a preference of non-sponsored Instagram posts over sponsored Instagram posts. The results of this study also show that young adults are not more likely to use non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers or travel agencies than sponsored travel content made by travel influencers in their travel planning behaviors and destination choices. 
      Still, it is important that both travel influencers and travel agencies are aware of this growing skepticism among young adults. On the long term, this phenomenon could indeed lead to a preference of non-sponsored Instagram posts over sponsored Instagram posts. If that is the case, influencer marketing in tourism loses its popularity and its effectiveness when it comes to influencing consumers' travel planning behaviors and destination choices. In order to stay credible sources of information in the eyes of their followers, travel influencers are advised to implement impartiality disclosures (Stubb & Colliander, 2019). By also stating that particular content is not sponsored, instead of only stating that particular content is sponsored, the micro celebrities prevent that young adults get suspicious about their intentions and credibility. Furthermore, in order to execute effective (influencer) marketing strategies, travel agencies are recommended to keep an eye on future research about the impact of influencer marketing. If future research continues to show that sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers is effective, travel agencies can keep investing in influencer marketing. Likewise, if future research starts to show that sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers is ineffective, travel agencies might want to rethink their decision and go back to traditional content made by themselves.
      
78.2.3 5.2.3. Limitations & Future Research
      The current study was conducted after carefully assessing theoretical relationships between the different variables under study. Besides, the researcher took into account a multitude of methodological considerations to construct a valid and reliable tool of measurement. Nevertheless, it is of crucial importance to mention that the current investigation is not without limitations. This means that its findings must be interpreted with the specific constraints of the study in mind. The next sections of this chapter provide an overview of the most significant limitations. 
      Firstly, as discussed before, some of the respondents misunderstood the nature of the experimental stimuli of this study. Because of this, it can be concluded that only 50% of the manipulations was perceived as intended. Certain respondents in condition 1 (sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers) perceived the experimental stimuli as non-sponsored, while certain respondents in condition 2 (non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers) and condition 3 (Instagram content made by travel agencies) perceived the experimental stimuli as sponsored. Although all travel posts mentioned whether they were sponsored or not, it still might be possible that they were not clear enough in terms of type of content (sponsored vs. non-sponsored). To increase the internal validity of the investigation, future researchers are advised to use experimental stimuli that are more obviously manipulated. Besides, in order to learn more about consumers' increasing skepticism towards influencer marketing, future researchers are also advised to add an extra type of content to the experiment, namely: non-sponsored Instagram content made by travel influencers with impartiality disclosure.  
      Another limitation of this research has to do with the time in which it is conducted. At the time of the investigation, which was May 2021, respondents were not allowed to travel (internationally) because of a global pandemic called COVID-19. To curb the spread of this pandemic, many countries implemented severe travel regulations and restrictions. Even though the experimental survey clearly asked respondents not to take into account the disease and its consequences for tourism, this still might have happened unconsciously. For this reason, future researchers are advised to conduct this study again in times without COVID-19. In the current study, respondents might have reacted more negatively than usual to e.g. the credibility of one of the content creators, just because of contradictory thoughts related to the pandemic. 
      Furthermore, there are some general limitations when it comes to conducting experimental research designs. For instance, according to Babbie (2011), experimental research designs are known for being relatively higher in external invalidity. This means that there are bigger possibilities that the conclusions drawn from the experimental results are not generalizable to the 'real' world. Moreover, the results of experimental research designs are often influenced by confounding variables. In this particular investigation, the variables age, gender and level of education were not found to have an effect of the answers given by the participants. Still, it might be possible that other confounding variables such as source familiarity have influenced respondents' answers. 



79 
References

Abidin, C., & Ots, M. (2016). Authenticity and credibility in brand scandal. In M. Edström & A. T. Kenyon (Eds.), Blurring the lines: Market-driven and democracy-driven freedom of expression (153-161). Nordicom
Abidin, C., & Thompson, E. C. (2012). Buymylife.com: Cyber-femininities and commercial intimacy in blogshops. Women's studies international forum, 35(6), 467-477. https://doi.org/10.1016/.wsif.2012.10.005
Babbie, E. (2011). The basics of social research. Cengage Learning, Inc
Barbe, D., Neuburger, L., & Pennington-Gray, L. (2020). Follow us on Instagram! Understanding the driving force behind following travel accounts on Instagram. E-review of tourism research, 17(4).
Beganovich, A. (2021). 100 top travel influencers in 2020. A&E. https://www.amraandelma.com/100-top-travel-influencers/
Bellman, S. (2017). Experimental design. In J. Matthes, C. S. Davis, & R. F. Potter (Eds.), The international encyclopedia of communication research methods (1-20). https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118901731.iecrm0098 
Boerman, S. C., Van Reijmersdal, E. A., & Neijens, P. C. (2012). Sponsorship disclosure: Effects of duration on persuasion knowledge and brand responses. Journal of communication, 62(6), 1047-1064. https://doi.org/ 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2012.01677.x
Boerman, S. C., Van Reijmersdal, E. A., & Neijens, P. C. (2015). Using eye tracking to understand the effects of brand placement disclosure types in television programs. Journal of advertising, 44(3), 196-207. https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2014.967423
Boerman, S. C., Willemsen, L. M., & Van Der Aa, E. P. (2017). "This post is sponsored": Effects of sponsorship disclosure on persuasion knowledge and electronic word of mouth in the context of Facebook. Journal of interactive marketing, 38, 82-92. 
Blackall, M. (2019). How many people travel abroad for holiday? The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/news/2019/jul/01/global-tourism-hits-record-highs-but-who-goes-where-on-holiday
Brehm, S. S., & Brehm, J. W. (1981). Psychological reactance: A theory of freedom and control. Academic Press. 
Cain, R. M. (2011). Embedded advertising on television: Disclosure, deception, and free speech rights. Journal of public policy and marketing, 30(2), 226-238. https://doi.org/10.1509/jppm.30.2.226
Camilleri, M. A. (2018). The tourism industry: An overview. Travel marketing, tourism economics and the airline product, 3-27.
Campbell, M. C., Mohr, G. S., & Verlegh, P. W. J. (2013). Can disclosures lead consumers to resist covert persuasion? The important roles of disclosure timing and type of response. Journal of consumer psychology, 23(4), 483-495. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcps.2012.10.012 
Chang, C. L., McAleer, M., & Ramos, V. (2020). A charter for sustainable tourism after COVID-19. Sustainability, 12 (9), 3671. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12093671
Childers, C. C., Lemon, L. L., & Hoy, M. G. (2018). #Sponsored #Ad: Agency perspective on influencer marketing campaigns. Journal of current issues & research in advertising, 40(3), 258-274. https://doi.org/10.1080/10641734.2018.1521113
Childers, T.L., & Rao, A.R. (1992). The influence of familial and peer-based reference groups on consumer decisions. Journal of consumer research, 19(2), 198-211. https://doi.org/10.1086/209296
Choi, S. J., Lehto, X. Y., & O'Leary, J. T. (2007). What does the consumer want from a DMO website? A study of US and Canadian tourists' perspectives. International journal of tourism research, 9(2), 59-72. https://doi.org/10.1002/jtr.594
Cox, C., Burgess, S., Sellitto, C., Buultjens, J. (2009). The Role of user-generated content in tourists' travel planning behavior. Journal of hospitality marketing & management, 18(8), 743-764). https://doi.org/10.1080/19368620903235753
Cunningham, S., & Craig, D. (2017). Being 'really real' on YouTube: Authenticity, community and brand culture in social media entertainment. Media international Australia, 164(1), 71-81. https://doi.org/10.1177/1329878X17709098 
Dibble, J. L., Hartman, T., & Rosaen, S. F. (2016). Parasocial interaction and parasocial relationship: Conceptual clarification and a critical assessment of measures. Human communication research, 41(1), 21-44. https://doi.org/10.1111/hcre.12063 
Duffy, B. E. (2017). (Not) Getting paid to do what you love: Gender, social media, and aspirational work. Yale University Press. 
Engel, J. F., Blackwell, R. D., & Miniard, P. W. (1990). Consumer behavior (6th ed.). Dryden Press. 
Evans, N. J., Phua, J., Lim, J., & Jun, H. (2017). Disclosing Instagram influencer advertising: The effects of disclosure language on advertising recognition, attitudes, and behavioral intent. Journal of interactive advertising, 17(2), 138-149. https://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2017.1366885
Fotiadis, A., Polyzos, S., & Huan, T. C. T. (2021). The good, the bad and the ugly on COVID-19 tourism recovery. Annals of tourism research, 87, 1-14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annals.2020.103117
Freberg, K., Graham, K., McGaughey, K., & Freberg, L. A. (2011). Who are the social media influencers? A study of public perceptions of personality. Public relations review, 37(1), 90-92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pubrev.2010.11.001
Friestad, M., & Wright, P. (1994). The persuasion knowledge model: How people cope with persuasion attempts. Journal of consumer research, 21(1), 1-31. https://doi.org/10.1086/209380
 Geuens, M., & De Pelsmacker, P. (2017). Planning and conducting experimental advertising research and questionnaire design. Journal of advertising, 46(1), 83-100. https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2016.1225233 
Gretzel, U. (2018). Influencer marketing in travel and tourism. Advances in social media for travel, tourism and hospitality: New perspectives, practice and cases, 147-156.
Harvey-Jenner, C. (2018). How we earn six-figure salaries by travelling the world. Cosmopolitan. https://www.cosmopolitan.com/uk/worklife/longform/a48846/instagram-influencers-how-to-earn-six-figure-salaries-travelling-world/ 
Hayes, A. F. (2009). Beyond Baron and Kenny: Statistical mediation analysis in the new millennium. Communication Monographs, 76(4), 408-420. https://doi.org/10.1080/03637750903310360
Hayes, A. F. (2018). Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: A regression-based approach (2nd ed.). Guilford Press. 
Heale, R., & Twycross, A. (2015). Validity and reliability in quantitative studies. Evidence based nursing, 18(3), 66-67. https://doi.org/10.1136/eb-2015-102129
Hoewe, J. (2017). Manipulation check. In J. Matthes, C. S. Davis, & R. F. Potter (Eds.), The international encyclopedia of communication research methods (pp. 1-5). https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118901731.iecrm0135 
Horton, D., & Wohl, R. (1956). Mass communication and para-social interaction. Psychiatry, 19(3), 215-229. https://doi.org/10.1080/00332747.1956.11023049 
Hovland, C. I., Janis, I. L., & Kelley, H. H. (1953). Communication and persuasion. Psychological studies of opinion change. Yale University Press. 
Hudson, S. (2008). Tourism and hospitality marketing: A global perspective. Sage.
Hwang, Y., & Jeong, S. H. (2016). "This is a sponsored blog post, but all opinions are my own": The effects of sponsorship disclosure on responses to sponsored blogposts. Computers in human behavior, 62, 528-535. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.04.026
Hyung-Park, D., Lee, J., & Han, I. (2007). The effect of on-line consumer reviews on consumer purchase intention: The moderating role of involvement. International journal of electronic commerce, 11(4), 125-148. 
Janssen, L., Fransen, M. L., Wulff, R., & van Reijmersdal, E. A. (2016). Brand placement disclosure effects on persuasion: The moderating role of consumer self-control. Journal of consumer behavior, 15(6), 503-515. https://doi.org/10.1002/cb.1587
Jeng, J., & Fesenmaier, D. (2002). Conceptualizing the travel decision-making hierarchy: A review of recent developments. Tourism analysis, 7(1), 15-32. https://doi.org/10.3727/108354202108749925
Kelman, H.C. (1958). Compliance, identification, and internalization three processes of attitude change. Journal of conflict resolution, 2(1), 51-60. https://doi.org/10.1177/002200275800200106
Kneesel, E., Baloglu, S., & Millar, M. (2010). Gaming destination images: Implications for branding. Journal of travel research, 49(1), 68-78. https://doi.org/10.1177/0047287509336474
Kusumasondjaja, S., & Tjiptono, F. (2019). Endorsement and visual complexity in food advertising on Instagram. Internet research, 29(4), 659-687. https://doi.org/10.1108/intr-11-2017-0459
Ladhari, R., Massa, E., & Skandrani, H. (2020). YouTube vloggers' popularity and influence: The roles of homophily, emotional attachment, and expertise. Journal of retailing and consumer services, 54, 1-11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2019.102027
Law, R., Leung, R., & Buhalis, D. (2009). Information technology applications in hospitality and tourism: A review of publications from 2005 to 2007. Journal of travel & tourism marketing, 26 (5-6), 599-623. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 10548400903163160. 
Lee, Y. J., & Ahn, H. Y. (2013). Interaction effects of perceived sponsor motives and Facebook credibility on willingness to visit social cause Facebook page. Journal of interactive advertising, 13(1), 41-52. https://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2013.768056
Lee, S., & Kim, E. (2020). Influencer marketing on Instagram: How sponsorships disclosure, influencer credibility, and brand credibility impact the effectiveness of Instagram promotional post. Journal of global fashion marketing, 11(3), 232-249. https://doi.org/10.1080/20932685.2020.1752766
 Lee, K. T., & Koo, D. M. (2012). Effects of attribute and valence of e-WOM on message adoption: Moderating roles of subjective knowledge and regulatory focus. Computers in human behavior, 28(5), 1974-1984. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2012.05.018
Litvin, S. W., Goldsmith, R. E., & Pan, B. (2008). Electronic word-of-mouth in hospitality and tourism management. Tourism management, 29(3), 458-468. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2007.05.011
Lock, S. (2020). Global tourism industry - Statistics & facts. Statista. https://www.statista.com/topics/962/global-tourism/
Lou, C., & Yuan, S. (2019). Influencer marketing: how message value and credibility affect consumer trust of branded content on social media. Journal of interactive advertising, 19(1), 58-73. https://doi.org/10.1080/15252019.2018.1533501
Mack, R. W., Blose, J. E., & Pan, B. (2008). Believe it or not: Credibility of blogs in tourism. Journal of vacation marketing, 14(2), 133-144.
MacKinnon, D. P. (2011). Integrating mediators and moderators in research design. Research on social work practice, 21(6), 675-681. https:// doi.org/10.1177/1049731511414148
MacKinnon, D. (2015). Mediating variable. In International encyclopedia of the social & behavioral sciences: Second edition (pp. 64-69). Elsevier Inc.
Magno, F., & Cassia, F. (2018). The impact of social media influencers in tourism. Anatolia, 29(2), 288-290. https://doi.org/10.1080/13032917.2018.1476981
Mediakix. (2017). Influencer spotlight: Interview with @doyoutravel's Instagrammer, Jack Morris. Mediakix. https://mediakix.com/blog/do-you-travel-jack-morris-instagrammer-interview/ 
Moran, G., & Muzellec, L. (2014). eWoM credibility on social networking sites: A framework. Journal of marketing communications, 23(2), 149-161. https://doi.org/10.1080/13527266.2014.969756
Neuman, W. L. (2014). Social research methods: Qualitative and quantitative approaches (7th ed., Pearson new internat. ed). Pearson. 
 Ohanian, R. (1990). Construction and validation of a scale to measure celebrity endorsers' perceived expertise, trustworthiness, and attractiveness. Journal of advertising, 19(3), 39-52. https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.1990.10673191
Pallant, J. (2016). SPSS survival manual: A step by step guide to data analysis using SPSS program. McGraw-Hill Education.  
Pan, B., & Fesenmaier, D. R. (2006). Online information search: Vacation planning process. Annals of tourism research, 33, 809-832.
Pearce, P. L. (1982). The social psychology of tourist behavior. Oxford. 
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1977). Forewarning, cognitive responding, and resistance to persuasion. Journal of personality and social psychology, 35(9), 645. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.35.9.645
Phua, J., Jin, S. V., & Kim, J. J. (2017). Uses and gratifications of social networking sites for bridging and bonding social capital: A comparison of Facebook, twitter, Instagram, and snapchat. Computers in human behavior, 72, 115-122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2017.02.041
Plog, S. C. (1974). Why destination areas rise and fall in popularity. Cornell hotel and restaurant administration quarterly, 14(4), 55-58.
Reactive. (2007). Web 2.0 for the tourism & travel industry. Reactive.
Ruel, E., Wagner, W. E., III, & Gillespie, B. J. (2019). The practice of survey research: Theory and applications (pp. 101-119). https://doi.org/10.4135/9781483391700 
Seabra, C., Abrantes, J. L., & Lages, L. F. (2007). The impact of using non-media information sources on the future use of mass media information sources. The mediating role of expectations fulfillment. Tourism management, 28(6), 1541-1554. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2007.02.008
Senecal, S., & Nantel, J. (2004). The influence of online product recommendations on consumers' online choices. Journal of retailing, 80(2), 159-169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretai.2004.04.001
Setiawan, B., Trisdyani, N. L. P., Adnyana, P. P., Adnyana, I. N., Wiweka, K., & Wulandani, H. R. (2018). The profile and behaviour of 'digital tourists' when making decisions concerning travelling case study: Generation Z in South Jakarta. Advances in research, 17(2), 1-13. https://doi.org/10.9734/air/2018/43872
Sharma, N. (2018). How Instagram works: Insights about photo sharing apps business and revenue model. Apptunix Blog. https://www.apptunix.com/blog/instagram-business-model/
Shuqair, S., & Cragg, P. (2017). The immediate impact of Instagram posts on changing the viewers' perceptions towards travel destinations. In 1st international conference on advanced research. 
Sigala, M. (2020). Tourism and COVID-19: Impacts and implications for advancing and resetting industry and research. Journal of business research, 117, 312-321. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.05.015 
Sohn, S., Seegebarth, B., & Moritz, M. (2017), The impact of perceived visual complexity of mobile online shops on user's satisfaction. Psychology & marketing, 34(2), 195-214. https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.20983
Sokolova, K., & Kefi, J. (2020). Instagram and YouTube bloggers promote it, why should I buy? How credibility and parasocial interaction influence purchase intentions. Journal of retailing and consumer services, 53, 1-9, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2019.01.011 
Sokolova, K., & Perez, C. (2021). You follow fitness influencers on YouTube. But do you actually exercise? How parasocial relationships, and watching fitness influencers, relate to intentions to exercise. Journal retailing and consumer services, 58, 1-11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jretconser.2020.102276 
Spector, P. E., & Brannick, M. T. (2011). Methodological urban legends: The misuse of statistical control variables. Organizational research methods, 14(2), 287-305. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428110369842
Stubb, C., & Colliander, J. (2019).  "This is not sponsored content" - The effects of impartiality disclosure and e-commerce landing pages on consumer responses to social media influencer posts. Computers in human behavior, 98, 210-222. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.04.024
Sukamolson, S. (2007). Fundamentals of quantitative research. Language institute Chulalongkorn University, 1, 2-3.
Swarbrooke, J., & Horner, S. (2007). Consumer behavior in tourism. Routledge.
The Influencer Marketing Hub. (2021). The state of influencer marketing in 2021: Benchmark report. https://influencermarketinghub.com/influencer-marketing-benchmark-report-2021/
Tsiakali, K. (2018). User-generated-content versus marketing-generated-content: Personality and content influence on traveler's behavior. Journal of hospitality marketing & management, 27(8), 946-972. https://doi.org/10.1080/19368623.2018.1477643
Tuch, A. N., Bargas-Avila, J. A., Opwis, K., & Wilhelm, F. H. (2009), Visual complexity of websites: Effects on users' experience, physiology, performance, and memory. International journal of human-computer studies, 67(9), 703-715. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2009.04.002
Van Nuenen, T. (2016). Here I am: Authenticity and self-branding on travel blogs. Tourist studies, 16(2), 192-212. https://doi.org/10.1177/1468797615594748 
Van Noort, G., Antheunis, M. L., & Van Reijmersdal, E. A. (2012). Social connections and the persuasiveness of viral campaigns in social network sites: Persuasive intent as the underlying mechanism. Journal of marketing communications, 18(1), 39-53. https://doi.org/10.1080/13527266.2011.620764
Wang, Y., & Pizam, A. (2011). Destination marketing and management: Theories and applications. Cabi.
Wei, M., Fischer, E., & Main, K. J. (2008). An examination of the effects of activating persuasion knowledge on consumer response to brands engaging in covert marketing. Journal of public policy and marketing, 27(1), 34-44. https://doi.org/10.1509/jppm.27.1.34
Weitzl, W. (2014). Measuring electronic word-of-mouth effectiveness. Developing and applying the eWOM trust scale. Springer Gabler. 
Weitzl, W., Wolfsteiner, E., Einwiller, S., & Wagner, U. (2016). When credibility truly matters online: Investigating the role of source credibility for the impact of customer reviews. Advances in Consumer Research, 44(6), 353-358. 
 Wellman, M. L., Stoldt, R., Tully, M., & Ekdale, B. (2020). Ethics of authenticity: Social media influencers and the production of sponsored content. Journal of Media Ethics, 35(2), 68-82. https://doi.org/10.1080/23736992.2020.1736078
Wong, C. H., Tan, G. W. H., Tan, B. I. and Ooi, K. B. (2015), Mobile advertising: The changing landscape of the advertising industry. Telematics and informatics, 32(4), 720-734. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2015.03.003
Xiang, Z., & Gretzel, U. (2010). Role of social media in online travel information search. Tourism Management, 31(2), 179-188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2009.02.016. 
Xu, X., & Pratt, S. (2018). Social media influencers as endorsers to promote travel destinations: An application of self-congruence theory to the Chinese Generation Y. Journal of travel & tourism marketing, 35(7), 958-972. https://doi.org/10.1080/10548408.2018.1468851
Ye, Q., Law, R., Gu, B., & Chen, W. (2011). The influence of user-generated content on travel behavior: An empirical investigation on the effects of e-word-of-mouth to hotel online bookings. Computers in human behavior, 27(2), 634-639. https://doi.org//10.1016/j.chb.2010.04.014 



80 Appendix A: Experiment Guide

Start of block: Introduction

Dear participant,

Thank you in advance for your participation in my research. For the master Media & Creative Industries at the Erasmus University in Rotterdam, I aim to investigate travel content published on Instagram. In the next 5-10 minutes, you will be asked to answer questions about this particular subject. I would like to ask you to read the questions thoroughly. It is important to mention that there are no correct or incorrect answers in this investigation. For this reason, please answer the questions as honestly as possible.   

Your answers will be used anonymously and confidentially. This means that they will not be shared with any third parties. Furthermore, your participation in this study is completely voluntary, meaning that you can stop at any time or abstain from answering any questions you do not feel comfortable with. Should this occur, please know that your answers will not be included in the analysis of this experimental survey.

Please be aware that, for the purpose of this study, you have to be between 18 and 24 years old.    

If you have any questions regarding the experimental survey, you can always email mediaresearchlm@gmail.com for clarification.

Thank you again for your participation. 

With kind regards,      
Lysanne Meijer 

Q2. I understand that my participation in this study is voluntary and anonymous. My answers will only be used for research purposes.
o Yes (1)
o No (2)

Skip to: End of survey if 'I understand that my participation in this study is voluntary and anonymous. My answers will only be used for research purposes' = No

End of block: Introduction


Start of block: Control question

Q3. How old are you?
............

Skip to: End of survey if 'How old are you?' < 18

End of block: Control question


Start of block: Condition 1 - sponsored travel content made by SMI

Please look at the following content and read the text carefully. 







End of block: Condition 1 - sponsored travel content made by SMI


Start of block: Condition 2 - non-sponsored travel content made by SMI

Please look at the following content and read the text carefully. 








End of block: Condition 2 - non-sponsored travel content made by SMI

Start of block: Condition 3 - travel content made by travel agency

Please look at the following content and read the text carefully. 







End of block: Condition 3 - travel content made by travel agency



Start of block: Condition 4 - anonymous travel content

Please look at the following content carefully. 

    

End of block: Condition 4 - anonymous travel content 


Start of block: Source credibility

NOTE: While answering the following questions, please do not take the COVID-19 pandemic and its restrictions into consideration. 

Q25. In my opinion, this travel influencer/travel agency/content creator can be described as...

1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)6 (6)7 (7)Undependableo o o o o o o DependableDishonesto o o o o o o HonestUnreliableo o o o o o o ReliableInsincereo o o o o o o SincereUntrustworthyo o o o o o o Trustworthy
Q26. In my opinion, this travel influencer/travel agency/content creator can be described as...

1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)6 (6)7 (7)Not an experto o o o o o o An expertInexperiencedo o o o o o o ExperiencedUnknowledgeableo o o o o o o KnowledgeableUnqualifiedo o o o o o o QualifiedUnskilledo o o o o o o Skilled
Q27. In my opinion, the content I just saw can be described as...

1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)6 (6)7 (7)Unattractiveo o o o o o o AttractiveNot classyo o o o o o o ClassyUglyo o o o o o o BeautifulPlaino o o o o o o ElegantNot sexyo o o o o o o Sexy

End of block: Source credibility


Start of block: Travel planning behavior

Please indicate the extent to which you agree with the following statements. 

Q29. In my opinion, pictures like the ones I just saw...

Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)Inspire me to travel (1) o o o o o Make me seriously consider to go on a vacation even though I had no intention before (2) o o o o o 
Q30. In my opinion, pictures like the ones I just saw...


Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)Help me find travel information when I need it (1) o o o o o Reduce my effort to find travel information (2) o o o o o Increase the quality of travel information (3) o o o o o 

Q31. In my opinion, pictures like the ones I just saw...
Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)Help me evaluate/compare travel destinations/
services/suppliers (1) o o o o o Lead me to expand my consideration set (destination/
accommodation options) (2) o o o o o Help me to reconfirm my travel selections (3) o o o o o 

Q32. In my opinion, pictures like the ones I just saw...





Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)Help me to book travel services/suppliers (1) o o o o o Influence what to do/see at destinations (2) o o o o o Help me purchase complementary destinations/services/suppliers to enrich my tourist experience (3) o o o o o 
End of block: Travel planning behavior


Start of block: Destination choices

Please answer the following question. 

*1 represents 'not recommend at all' and 5 represents 'definitely recommend'.

Q34. To what extent would you...

1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Recommend the destinations shown in the pictures to your friends and family? (1) o o o o o 

Please answer the following question.

*1 represents 'not consider at all' and 5 represents 'definitely consider'. 

Q36. To what extent would you...

1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Consider visiting, or revisiting, the destinations shown in the pictures? (1) o o o o o 

End of block: Destination choices


Start of block: Advertisement recognition 

Display this question if condition = 1, condition = 2, or condition = 3

Please answer the following question. 

Q38. Do you agree or disagree that the pictures you just saw contain sponsored elements?
o Agree (1)
o Disagree (2)
End of block: Advertisement recognition 


Start of block: Source recognition 
Display this question if condition = 1, condition = 2, or condition = 3

Please answer the following question. 

Q40. Do you remember who created this content?
o A travel influencer (1)
o A travel agency (2)

End of block: Source recognition 


Start of block: Source familiarity 

Display this question if condition = 1, condition = 2, or condition = 3

Please answer the following question. 

*1 represents 'not familiar at all' and 5 represents 'very familiar'. 

Q42. How familiar are you with...

1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)the creator of this content? (1) o o o o o 

End of block: Source familiarity 
 

Start of block: Demographic questions

You are almost at the end of the survey! You have a few more questions to go. 
Q44. What is your gender?
o Male (1)
o Female (2)
o Other, namely (3): ......
o I prefer not to say (4)

Q45. What is the highest level of school you have completed or the highest degree you have obtained?
o Less than high school degree (1)
o High school graduate (2)
o Some college but no degree (3)
o Associate degree in college (4)
o Bachelor's degree in college (5)
o Master's degree (6)
o Doctoral degree (7)
o Professional degree (8)
o I prefer not to say (9)

Q46. What is your employment status currently?
o Employed for wages (1)
o Self-employed (2)
o Out of work and looking for work (3)
o A homemaker (4)
o A student (5)
o Military (6)
o Unable to work (7)
o Other, namely (8): .....
o I prefer not to say (9)

Q47. In which country do you currently reside?
▼ Afghanistan (1) ... Zimbabwe (1357)

Q48. Do you use Instagram?
o Yes (1)
o No (2)

Skip to: Q50 if 'Do you use Instagram?' = No
Q49. On average, how many hours a day have you spent on Instagram over the past week? (please only use numbers)
..........

Q50. I usually make trips for...
o Tourism (1)
o Business (2)
o Study (3)
o Visiting acquaintances (4)
o Other, namely (5): ..... 

End of block: Demographic questions


Start of block: End of survey

Yeah! You have reached the end of this experimental survey. Thank you very much for your participation. Your answers are extremely valuable for my research into the differences between travel content made by social media influencers and travel content made by travel agencies.  

If you have any further questions regarding the questionnaire, you can always send an email to mediaresearchlm@gmail.com for clarification. Besides, if you would like to read the final version of my master's thesis, please let me know after the 24th of June.       

Please be aware that some of the content you saw in this experimental survey was fictional. 

You can close this window now. 

With kind regards, 

Lysanne Meijer

End of block: End of survey


81 Appendix B: Experimental Survey Flow

Block: Introduction (1question)
Block: Control question (1 question)
Randomizer (evenly present elements): 
	--> Block: Condition 1 - sponsored travel content made by SMI 
o Embedded data: Condition = 1
o Embedded data: Source = travel influencer
	--> Block: Condition 2 - non-sponsored travel content made by SMI
o Embedded data: Condition = 2
o Embedded data: Source = travel influencer
	--> Block: Condition 3 - travel content made by travel agency 
o Embedded data: Condition = 3
o Embedded data: Source = online travel agency
	--> Block: Condition 4 - anonymous travel content 
o Embedded data: Condition = 4
o Embedded data: Source = content creator
Block: Source credibility (3 questions)
Block: Travel planning behavior (4 questions)
Block: Destination choices (2 questions) 
Block: Advertisement recognition (1 question)
Block: Source recognition (1 question)
Block: Source familiarity (1 question)
Block: Demographic questions (7 questions)
Block: End of survey




82 
      









Who can change our minds? Key factors of online travel communities' influence on travel intention
 



	


Student Name:	Pia Erman
Student Number:	539461

Supervisor: 		Joao Fernando Ferreira Goncalves, PhD


Master Media Studies - Media & Creative Industries
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication
Erasmus University Rotterdam


Master's Thesis 
June 2020



WHO CAN CHANGE OUR MINDS? KEY FACTORS OF ONLINE TRAVEL COMMUNITIES' INFLUENCE ON TRAVEL INTENTION

ABSTRACT
User-generated reviews are becoming important sources of information on travel. In literature, the importance of user-generated content when making travel decisions was mostly focused on the message or the person conveying it. The actual platform on which the review was posted has become prominent only recently. Though much has been researched, there is still a gap in the literature on what factors of these communities contribute to higher travel intention. In this study, an extended model of Theory of planned behaviour was used to understand these factors and fill in the gap. Predictors of behaviour such as user experience of the platforms, travel involvement and eWOM scepticism as well as source credibility were chosen to best research the problem. To answer the research question, an experimental study has to be carried out. First, to test travel intention, the island Tenerife was chosen as a destination, based on Eurostat statistics. Next, a pre-test was completed to determine the message and picture of the review about Tenerife. Lastly, an experiment was carried out using travel platforms Instagram, TripAdvisor and Google Maps as independent variables. The survey was disseminated amongst major Europeans and people living in Europe. 196 responses were gathered and analyzed using SPSS. It was shown that source credibility is significantly different on each platform. It also influences travel intention, while user experience turned out to be influential of perceived credibility. Interestingly, eWOM scepticism had no mediation effect on travel intention. Lastly, travel involvement showed no moderation effect on source credibility. The findings also show the highest eWOM scepticism on Instagram and the highest credibility on Google Maps. The implications of the study contribute to professionals in tourism and in marketing to plan their campaigns and prepare highly targeted promotions of the services using adequate platforms. Moreover, a discussion on the differences amongst the platforms and their benefits are also explained. These implications could be beneficial for the platforms to adapt to the public and make their content more credible.

KEYWORDS: travel intention, online travel platforms, source credibility, eWOM skepticism, theory of planned behaviour

Table of Contents

ABSTRACT AND KEYWORDS
1. Introduction	1
2. Theoretical framework	4
2.1 Theory of planned behaviour	5
2.2 Travel intention and eWOM	7
2.3 Credibility of online travel communities	10
2.4 Online travel communities	12
2.4.1 TripAdvisor	14
2.4.2 Instagram	15
2.4.3 Google Maps	16
3. Methodology	19
3.1 Choice of method	20
3.2 Sampling	20
3.2.1 Sampling method	21
3.2.2 Random assignment	22
3.2.3 Description of sample	22
3.3 Operationalization	23
3.3.1 Independent variables online travel platforms	23
3.3.2 Dependent variable travel intention	24
3.3.3 Variable source credibility	25
3.3.4 Mediating variable eWOM scepticism	26
3.3.5 Mediating variable user experience	27
3.3.6 Moderating variable travel involvement	27
3.4 Research design and data collection	28
3.4.1 Pre-test	28
3.4.2 Pre-test of potential stimuli	29
3.4.3 Pre-test results	32
3.5 Validity and reliability	35
3.6 Method of data analysis	38
4. Results	38
5. conclusion	42
5.1 Limitations and further research	47
References	50
Appendix A: Pre-test	55
Appendix B: Experiment survey	81


List of tables
Table 3.1: Difference among six tested reviews based on several characteristics (mean)	33
Table 3.2: Difference among platforms on authenticity and believability (mean)	34
Table 4.1: Differences among the evaluation of the user experience of platforms (mean)	42


List of figures
Graph 2.1: Model of a Theory of planned behaviour (Ajzen, 1985)	6
Graph 2.2: Research model	17


1 
83 1. Introduction
	Europeans love to travel. The number of personal trips has been consistently rising and with it, the number of sources to plan the vacations with. Since then, not only has the planning part of travelling transformed, but the acquisition and dissemination of information surrounding travelling have undergone deep changes. The way travel decisions are made has drastically changed in the last two decades, mostly due to the emergence of Web 2.0. The traditional face to face communication or word-of-mouth (WOM) has been replaced by electronic-word-of-mouth (eWOM). This change influenced not only the number of information sources but also the credibility of these sources since many users can now be anonymous, while information can be misguiding or false. In my thesis, I want to explore the importance of credibility for travel intention while also researching what makes a certain source credible now that WOM has been replaced by eWOM.
	Presently, eWOM has become an important and permanent part of a marketing mix in the tourism sector (Cheung, Lee, & Rabjohn, 2008), influencing future travellers and impacting their travel intentions. More and more travellers are making their purchases online, which are in the majority of times affected by online reviews (Ye, Law, Gu & Chen, 2011). Tourism managers subsequently need to be aware of these procurements and tailor the reviews to their clients. This encompasses the contents of reviews as well as the environment in which they are placed. While a great deal is known about what persuades people to follow online reviews, little is known about which factors contribute to follow the reviews in specific online communities, such as travel platforms (Casalo, Flavian, & Guinaliu, 2011). 	Casalo et al. (2011) found out that attitude is the key determinant of travel intention, with trust and perceived usefulness as important antecedents. Moreover, they tested the personal characteristics of respondents to research their influence on travel intention. Their findings were similar to Lam and Hsu (2005), who also focused on three groups of factors influencing behaviour; source of advice, nature of the advice, and personal characteristics of travellers. Both studies were complemented by Soliman's (2019) research on tourists' intentions to revisit a destination. All these and many more studies (Hsu & Huang, 2012) focus on attitudes and therefore place overall emphasis on the attempt to travel, not the actual act of travelling. In my research, I aim to achieve just that. I want to investigate the factors contributing to the action of travel by reading reviews on online travel communities. As most of the research mentioned before consistently proves that credibility plays an important role in the process, source credibility is used as the precursor of travel intention. 
           Therefore, the study will investigate the factors contributing to source credibility and further travel intention. It will contemplate the factors from previous studies and expand on understanding with new, additional attributes.
	RQ: Which factors of online travel communities most contribute to perceived eWOM credibility and further travel intention?
 
	Understanding the importance of the credibility of the travel community and the characteristics that determine it can be beneficial in many areas of society. Firstly, it can help people working in the tourism industry understand what makes platforms credible and focus on improving those characteristics in their promotions. Moreover, it may advise them on which online platforms are best to endorse their services or products. Since trip planning is in 75% done on the Internet (Casalo et al., 2011), this information can be extremely helpful in reaching future travellers. Similarly, the results can help professionals in advertising and marketing. Identifying the most credible and influential platforms can help them frame the campaigns on the most adequate platforms for their target group. Lastly, it could also help online travel communities to discover what sets them apart from other communities. Since the data will compare three different online travel platforms TripAdvisor, Instagram and Google Maps, the results can show their significant features that improve or lessen credibility. 
           To answer my research question, a theoretical framework that would encompass factors influencing travel intention needs to be defined. I refer to the Theory of planned behaviour (Ajzen, 1985), which despite its simplicity greatly contributes to the understanding of the behaviour of individuals. Based on the framework, the independent variables are online travel platforms TripAdvisor, Instagram and Google Maps and my dependant variables are source credibility and travel intention. Next, I need to find the factors that could be contributing to source credibility. Considering eWOM has started to influence every aspect of travel, businesses are finding ways to incorporate eWOM into their marketing strategies, using consumer online reviews to promote their service or destination (Cheung et al., 2008). This has led to an emergence of new phenomena, known as eWOM scepticism. This factor is also included in the analysis. It is revealed as distrust in eWOM connections due to certain characteristics of the source, such as anonymity, withheld payments etc. (Zhang, Ko, & Carpenter, 2016). As suggested by Casalo, et al. (2011) I also consider travel involvement as one of the factors contributing to source credibility. For the last factor, following the recommendations by Dou, Walden, Lee, & Lee (2012), I include user experience as one of the important characteristics. 
           To answer the research question, this thesis resorts to quantitative research using an experiment as a method. It assures that I can compare the answers for each platform and thus contrast their characteristics. By choosing an experiment as a method, I also had to conduct a pre-test that analysed the most appropriate review and the pictures to use in the final survey. The distribution of the survey took place in May 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic and included everyone from Europe above the age of 18. After, a presentation the results for each hypothesis and discussion of the findings can be found. At the end of the thesis, I also state the limitations and recommendations for further research. 

84 2. Theoretical framework
	In Europe, travelling as a free-time activity has continuously grown in popularity since the Second World War (Blackall, 2019). Its consequences were apparent in advances in the air industry that consequently led to a mass transport system. Tourism soon became and was treated as an industry, giving rise to package tours in the 1950s. These not only enabled cheaper travel but also an increase in revenue for tourism services (Pearce, 1982). Following this burst, since the 1960s, tourism and travel have also gained great interest in an academic sphere, receiving more and more attention in various disciplines, especially in social sciences and psychology. Academia first struggled with the definitions of tourism and tourist, which are, especially from the research perspective, two different entities (Pearce, 1982). Though not exhaustive and in some instances too broad, the basis of the definition of a tourist remained the same since the beginning. A tourist is a "temporary visitor staying at least 24 hours in the country visited" (Pearce, 1982, p. 3), as long as the visit is motivated by either health, education, spiritual values or self-indulgence. Though it was later altered to encompass also the daily tourists, this definition will be used in the thesis.	
	As described, people have been tourists for several decades, and while the means of transport and the number of destinations have been changing, so have the travel decisions and planning. It has been researched that tourists account for several different information sources to determine the image of the destination. These sources can be divided into two components: the organic, including people's own experiences and non-commercial information, and induced, including mainly commercial messages. In the past, tourists have mostly relied on organic sources (family and friends), as well as some print messages such as brochures. Later, the number of sources grew with the rise of touristic TV programs and the Internet. Now, with the rise of Web 2.0, the number of information sources has not only increased, but tourists can now become information sources themselves (Sparks & Pan, 2008).	
	When choosing a travel destination, future tourists are thus faced with countless information sources that can alter or amplify their travel intention. These sources can also differ based on which phase of travel one decides to use them. They can be categorized into pre-purchase sources and sources at the destination (Sparks & Pan, 2008). Since I want to research travel intention in this thesis, I will only focus on pre-purchase information sources. The decision-making process leading up to a choice of destination is complex and long-lasting. To understand the psychological and social cues surrounding the tourist's intention to travel, I will base my research on the theory of planned behaviour. 

84.1 2.1 Theory of planned behaviour
	The theory of planned behaviour (TPB) is a well-known socio-psychological theory, developed by Ajzen in 1985. The theory is an extension of the theory of reasoned action that with a simple model aims to explain the informational and motivational influences on behaviour. In his model, Ajzen (1985, p. 29) clarifies that the behavioural intention "is an intention to try to perform a certain behaviour". By this, he heightens the importance of understanding that intention is an attempt to achieve certain behaviour, not an actual prediction of that behaviour being carried out. The more control someone has over their actions and factors influencing it, the higher the chance that intention will end in attempted behaviour (Ajzen, 1985). 
 	In many studies (Hsu & Huang, 2012; Sparks & Pan, 2008; Yuzhanin and Fisher, 2016) as well as in the TPB model, the intention is often thought of as predecessor of behaviour. Several factors influence and predict behavioural intention. These factors are behavioural, normative and control beliefs (Ajzen, 1985) which further develop into three elements immediately predicting behavioural intention (as shown in Figure 2.1):	
	1.  Attitude towards the behaviour that covers only the attitude toward the target behaviour and not the object of evaluation (Ajzen, 1985). In tourism, such attitudes could include feelings towards a travel service formed on different attributes (Hsu & Huang, 2012).
	2. Subjective norms encompass tourists' perceptions of what others may think of their behaviour, especially family and friends, and the need to comply with these perceptions (Ajzen, 1985). When travelling, tourists may worry about the family's feelings towards their travel destination or the services used there (Sparks & Pan, 2008).
	3. Perceived behavioural control (PBC) highlights that tourists' perception of their ability to perform a behaviour (Ajzen, 1985). Tourists often struggle with time restrictions, money problems or cultural differences when choosing a travel destination (Sparks & Pan, 
2008).

Figure 2.1: Model of a Theory of planned behaviour (Ajzen, 1985)
	
	TPB model has been extensively used in the research of tourism and tourist behaviour. For instance, Lam and Hsu (2004) used it when predicting the influence of past behaviour on behavioural intention and the choice of travel destination. Hsu and Huang (2012) successfully extended the model focusing on marketing implications of their findings of the influence of images and positive messages on travel intention. Yuzhanin and Fisher (2016) researched the efficacy of the model for predicting travel intentions. They found out that the model is applicable when the behaviour is precisely defined and that the model is still sufficient also when adding new variables to it. This implies that using this model also requires some critical perspective during the research, but an addition of new variables or expansion of existing ones does not make the model less applicable. If anything, consideration of just one variable due to its simplicity and specificity is even encouraged by Ajzen (1985) and other authors. Finally, Sparks and Pan (2008) also confirmed the sufficiency of the model when researching the behavioural intentions of tourists.	
	Based on these findings, the TPB model will be used to determine travel intention in this thesis. Since Yuzhanin and Fisher (2016) state that determining the behaviour and product is crucial to conduct valuable research, I will first define the basic terms used in this thesis. The behavioural intention will be considered as travel intention, the target behaviour will be travelling to that destination and the product will be a destination, properly determined in the pre-test. Furthermore, Ajzen (1985) argues that simplicity is the advantage of this model. That means that it is unnecessary to use multiple different variables in the same framework. Due to this, I will only focus on a factor of attitude towards the behaviour. Taking into account only one variable is reasonable from two perspectives. First, it is recommended when using the model to only focus on one variable, in my case the attitude towards the behaviour (Ajzen, 1985). It was also pointed out by the author that not all parts of the model contribute to the final intention equally or simultaneously. Researching just this variable can thus indicate whether it has a stronger impact than the others already researched. The other reason to focus on only one variable from the model is that the attitude is the only factor influenced by the information sources. When discussing subjective norms, they are mostly influenced by people who are close to us and their perceptions of our behaviour. Since travellers sharing reviews about travel destinations do not critique a person's behaviour, this factor cannot be incorporated into the analysis. Furthermore, the factor of perceived behavioural control concerns only the abilities of the traveller, over which the reviewer has no control. This variable also cannot be considered in this research. 	
	Therefore, in my research, I will only consider the factor of attitude to answer my research question. I will do so similarly to Sparks and Pan (2008), who expended the model to incorporate the influence of information sources on travel intention. Though successful, their research only questions the sources used by outbound tourists and does not extend further than stating the most common ones and their efficacy. In my thesis, I want to expand on their extended model and research the influence of information sources, explicitly eWOM, on beliefs formed about a travel destination and these implications on a travel intention. 

84.2 2.2 Travel intention and eWOM
	Before travelling, many tourists face the uncertainty of choosing the right travel destination. Different information sources help people create images and form attitudes about the target destination. This increases their confidence in the decision before travel. Most of the time, the internal information is not enough to make decisions. Future tourists then turn to external sources which are now available either offline or online. Lately, the Internet has become the most used external source (Lee, Law & Murphy, 2011). According to Casalo et al. (2011), more than 75% of all travels, tourists use the Internet for some part of their travel planning. 
	The rise of Web 2.0 not only enabled people to easily access a vast number of sources but also allowed them to become the source themselves. This rapid growth of different applications, made possible by Web 2.0, gives power to the consumers to share in two-way-communication their experiences and opinions through user-generated-content (UGC). Most of the UGC in tourism refers to online reviews describing hotels, travel destinations or travel services (Sigala, 2008). These reviews have become an indispensable source of information for tourists, most of the time altering people's behaviours before and during travelling. The change in behaviour is especially significant since tourists perceive fellow travellers as more objective, up-to-date, enjoyable and reliable than commercial messages or travel agencies (Ye et al., 2011). Consumers also perceive online reviews as more trustworthy, with most people equating them to personal recommendations (O'Reilly, MacMillan, Mumuni, & Lancendorfer, 2016). The impact of UGC on purchase behaviour has also been shown by several studies and it has been especially evident in experience goods (Ye et al., 2011). We can assume that a similar type of behaviour would be shown in travellers as well. From this, we can imply that the traditional face to face communication (WOM) has been replaced by eWOM. 
	eWOM is defined as "positive or negative statement made by potential, actual, or former customers about a product or company, which is made available to a multitude of people and institutions over the Internet" (Moran & Muzellec, 2017, p. 150). It can appear in various places throughout the sphere of the Internet, but there are three main sources of information that are competing for attention. The first source are normal Internet users, who write user-generated content such as product reviews, the second are professional media gatekeepers, producing materials for editorial websites, and third are marketing professionals creating promotion content (Dou et al., 2012, p. 1555). 
	In the thesis, I will only focus on the first type of source i.e. product reviews or in tourism, travel reviews. This information is now available not only from people close to us, such as friends and family but also from people we do not know or who are not in our geographical area. Most of the online travel reviews can be found on global online travel communities such as the ones researched in this study (TripAdvisor, Instagram and Google Maps). These communities make information easier to find, but the abundance of the reviews makes it harder for travellers to process and judge them. This leads to "lower search costs and higher cognitive costs" (Lee et al., p. 676). The same reviews can also be perceived differently by various travellers, depending on their source of information and previous experiences (Casalo et al., 2011). Frequency and recency of prior purchases can also be key factors in predicting the future behaviour of consumers (Hsu & Huang, 2012). Since differentiating reviews in usefulness and credibility from each-other requires a lot of cognitive work from tourists' side, they often turn to external factors of online travel communities to judge the reviews. 
	Casalo et. al. (2012, p. 630) define (at least) three different factors that raise the intention to follow a travel review in an online travel community:
	"1. Those related to the nature of the advice (perceived usefulness of the advice)
	2. Those related to the source that provides the advice (trust in the online community)
	3. Those related to the personal characteristics of the traveller that decides whether to 	follow the advice or not (consumer's susceptibility to interpersonal influence)." 
	
	The first and third factors have been identified by several prior studies as the two most important factors for predicting purchase behaviour. But little is known about the motivations to follow the advice in various online communities. Dou et al. (2012) argue that since there is a vast number of reviews online, the original creator of the message can get lost in the crowd. This is supported also in the research of the area of health by Hu and Sundar (2010), who not only claim that the author can get lost in the crowd, but that in some cases chooses to be anonymous. Sources of advice such as a website or community can become an important factor in assessing the credibility of the message in these instances. Though some studies define source credibility as relating to the original source of the review i.e. person who wrote the review, in the "context of tourism the source credibility refers to the credibility of the website or online community in which eWOM of travel destination is disseminated" (Wang, 2014, p. 35).

84.3 2.3 Credibility of online travel communities
	It can be assumed that in the flood of online reviews, travel communities can have an impact on the perceived credibility of the reviews and consequently on travel intentions of the receiver. These online travel communities as sources of information can be a critical variable when determining reviews' usefulness and credibility, especially when the identity of the author is anonymous or ambiguous (Dou et al., 2012). Hussain, Ahmed, Jafar, Rabnawaz and Jianzhou (2017) point out that a website's reputation can have a big influence on the credibility of information, and that their reputation is related to the perceived expertness of the website. Moreover, Casalo et al. (2011) indicate that little research has been done in the field of online travel communities and their influence on travel decisions. Authors suggest focusing only on the motivations to follow online reviews. Moreover, they also state the benefits of researching the characteristics of the reviews and platforms to understand these motivations. In their research, they also specifically focus on online travel communities as sources of online reviews but examine only trust in the community, again neglecting the factors influencing it. While Dou et al. (2012) do acknowledge the importance of the source of information in their research, they neglect the source characteristics and lack an explanation on the factors influencing source credibility. That is why in my research I want to focus on the factors influencing the credibility of online travel communities, their effect on the perception of online reviews and further communities' credibility as an influence on travel intention. 
	In previous research, credibility has been identified as the most important online predictor of eWOM persuasiveness (Weitzl, Wolfsteiner, Einwiller, & Wagner, 2016). Credibility "refers to the quality of the information or a source which may or may not result in trusting intentions and/or behaviours" (Weitzl, 2014, p. 115). It can be thought of as a predecessor of trust. Credibility can be divided into three perspectives: source, content, and medium credibility. In my research I will focus on source credibility, considering online travel communities as sources of online reviews. The concept of source credibility has been extensively studied as the predictor of consumer behaviour since credible sources develop stronger attitudes toward certain products and encourage purchases more than less credible sources. Source credibility is defined as "the extent to which an information source is perceived to be believable, competent and trustworthy by information recipient" (Ohanian, 1990, p. 41). In other words, source credibility affects traveller's approval of the source. 
	Based on this, I first need to establish if the chosen travel platforms differentiate between each other are different based on the level of credibility.
	H1: The researched online travel platforms differ in their levels of credibility. 
	
	Source credibility has two dimensions: trustworthiness and expertise. These two dimensions refer to the extent people trust the source and perceive it as knowledgeable and skilled enough to share the information with other people (Dou et al., 2012). Since source credibility affects the target behaviour and thus travel intention (Weitzl et al., 2016; Shan, 2016), my next hypothesis will test the connection between both.
           H2: The higher the credibility of the online travel community, the greater the travel intention.

	As stated by Wang (2014), information disseminated in online travel communities regards mostly travel destinations. Since reviews can easily be adapted to best suit the business and attract more travellers, travellers have become sceptical about certain reviews posted in travel communities. Travellers thus become more suspicious about the reviews, lowering their trust in them. Since distrust can generate an overall negative attitude toward the online reviews, eWOM scepticism has to be taken into account when measuring source credibility of online travel communities. eWOM scepticism is pre-dispositional distrust in eWOM communications that has three dimensions: truthfulness, motivation and identity (Zhang et al., 2016). 
	When judging the credibility of online reviews, eWOM scepticism has been shown to influence consumers' intentions and behaviours. It lowers the credibility of information source due to hidden author's identity, disguised intent of the review, and overall exaggeration in messages (Zhang et al., 2016). 
	eWOM scepticism can thus be thought of as distrust in an online review. That is why I want to research if with higher eWOM scepticism, the travel intention will decrease.
           H3: With the higher scepticism in an online travel community, the travel intention will be lower.

	As mentioned before, there are many reasons for travellers not to trust certain reviews. On Instagram, more than other chosen platforms, all these reasons can be found. The author of the message can be anonymous or have a private account, which makes it impossible to examine them before trusting the review. Further, with the rise of travel influencers and sponsorship deals, the motivations for posting a travel review might not be disclosed or even be manipulative, leading on the future travellers (Miller, 2017). Lastly, Instagram is known for its exaggeration of luxurious lives and breath-taking photos that everyone would like to be a part of. Unfortunately, destinations and attractions in real life commonly do not resemble those in the pictures, with larger crowds, corrections using Photoshop or simply altered colours. Not only pictures, but also reviews can often be misleading, speaking positively about a destination due to monetary incentives (Moran & Muzellec, 2017). Based on this I expect that Instagram will have the highest eWOM scepticism ranking.
	H4: The eWOM scepticism will be the highest on Instagram.

84.4 2.4 Online travel communities
	Based on the studies by Hu and Sundar (2010), and Dou et al. (2012), I would like to investigate which factors influence the intention to follow reviews in information sources, in my case, online travel communities TripAdvisor, Google Maps and Instagram. As Casalo et al. (2011) point out, reasons for following advice in a certain online travel community have been under-researched. Credibility can explain travel intention to some extent, but some authors argue that other factors could have an impact on travel intention or influence the perceived credibility of these platforms. 
           It was recommended by Casalo et al. (2011) to investigate the relationship between high-involved travellers in online travel communities with their travel intention. Involvement is defined as "a salient concept for understanding leisure, recreation, and tourism behaviour" (Ferns & Walls, 2012, p. 27). In tourism studies, it is mostly used to examine the involvement of tourists in general tourism activities, shopping, specific touristic activities and gambling. There are three different types of travel involvement: enduring travel involvement, situational travel involvement, and response travel involvement. The first explains the part travel plays in peoples' everyday life. It is an ongoing process of an individual who finds pleasure in travel. The second is involvement in travel depending on a certain situation, whether it is a cheap airfare or the purpose of the trip. The last relates to the inner state of involvement based on prior involvement (Ferns & Walls, 2012). Since I want to research the overall involvement with travel and not one that is triggered by certain events or is influenced by other factors, I will only include enduring travel involvement in my analysis. Due to high involvement and consequently greater travel experiences I predict that these travellers have clearer and better-formed opinions about the travel platforms. Their travel intention will be higher with the platforms they perceive as credible since they have previous positive experiences of them as being truthful and expert. Low-involved travellers do not perceive travel as important and therefore tend not to differentiate sources based on credibility. This emanates either from lack of experience in using online travel platforms or ignorance of the validity of the information received from them. 
	Involvement will moderate the effect of credibility on travel intentions. 
	H5: High-involved travellers show higher travel intention when the online travel community is perceived as credible.
 
           The online travel platforms I have chosen differ in various characteristics but an important one: they all depend on user-generated content to grow and inspire other people to travel. I chose these three specific platforms since they use the same form of online travel reviews. People can post picture and text to review a destination or service, while other characteristics of the review and the reviewer differ to one another. Cheung et al. (2008) point out that future travellers can also be influenced by platforms' attractiveness and likeability. Moreover, Casalo et al. (2011) suggest that perceived privacy, security and ease of use can affect peoples' perceived credibility in the community. All these factors can be summed up under what Dou et al. (2012) refer to as an interface of the intermediary, in this case, online travel communities. They also argue that the interface of the platform can influence peoples' perception of the review, the author and consequently attitude towards the destination. Therefore, I will include a short description of the interface and users' demographic profile of each platform to better understand their differences and test these assumptions with a hypothesis.
84.4.1  
84.4.2 2.4.1 TripAdvisor 
           The first online travel platform that I will base my research on is TripAdvisor. The world's largest travel platform was launched in 2000 when only reviews of accommodations were published. After 20 years, the platform now has more than 490 million users each month and offers more than 760 million reviews on its website. Despite its size and popularity, TripAdvisor suffered a great loss in credibility in 2019, when several investigations uncovered that more than 50% of their reviews are not genuine (Walker, 2019). Brand awareness and usage have declined, but TripAdvisor remains one of the most utilised travel platforms for travellers. 
           Recently, TripAdvisor has changed its user interface. Its interface is quite complicated and offers a wide variety of options to its users when writing or searching for a review. Future travellers can search for hotels, attractions, restaurants, vacation rentals, flights and more for any travel destination worldwide. Authors are visible with a name and a profile picture. Upon clicking on their profile, users can also see the number of contributions made, number of followers, date of joining the community and much more. Moreover, TripAdvisor also offers users to rate each other's reviews based on their perceived helpfulness (Shan, 2016). Travellers can thus see the number of people the review had been helpful to, number of reposts and number of saves. It is also possible to contact the author directly about their review, photo or video posted. In case the review was paid for, the review is labelled as 'sponsored'. 
           The exact demographics of TripAdvisor users are hard to obtain since there is no need for them to register to contribute to the community. However, there is much to discover about their preferences for using TripAdvisor. Majority of users read the reviews before booking a hotel, half of them read them before eating in a restaurant and 44% use the platform before choosing a tourist attraction (TripAdvisor, 2013). Thus, from both reputational and users' perspective, it is an interesting platform to research in my thesis.
 
84.4.3 2.4.2 Instagram 
           Instagram is a free photo and video sharing application. It was created to connect people and allow them to share their experiences with friends (https://about.instagram.com/). In the last few years, Instagram has transformed into a platform where users not only share the experiences but are also only 10 clicks away from purchasing a plane ticket when seeing a tourist destination (Miller, 2017). The effects of Instagram on tourism can be already seen all over the world, from increased tourism growth after collaborations with influencers, to crowds in so-called 'Instagram spots', popular tourist attractions shared on Instagram. Due to its predominantly picture view display, Instagram has been established as an effective marketing tool in tourism (Miller, 2017). Its high engagement, effectiveness and popularity make it an interesting online travel platform to investigate. 
           Instagram offers the possibility of open and private accounts. When open, everybody can access the profile, review the shared content and learn more about the person. When the profile is closed, only the name, the profile picture and followers are visible. This already creates a contradictory state for the users since they are on one hand able to discover and evaluate the reviewers, and on the other unsure of their motivations. Though reviewers are by law obliged to disclose any paid promotions, unfortunately, this is still not accomplished by the majority of profiles. The app also makes it easy to search for reviews about destinations, either by hashtag (#) or by the geolocation indicated above the post or in Instagram stories. The interface itself is simple to use, with only the possibility of scrolling up and down the content feed or watching stories. At each content posted, people can see the number of likes and comments by other users, time posted and the description of the content (the message). They can also see the person that posted it (the name and the profile picture). Since there is no review system for authors, this information is everything a future traveller can check to review the message. 
           Instagram has more than one billion active users. The majority are women, with almost 90% of all users originating from the outside USA. Instagram is used in 30% by people aged 18-24 years, and in 35% by people aged 25-34 years. This means that two-thirds of all users are under 35 years old. Moreover, these users visit at least one business profile daily, with more than 70% of them using Instagram for discovering new products and learning about them (Aslam, 2020). 
 
84.4.4 2.4.3 Google Maps
           Lastly, I will focus on the platform Google Maps. Though it originally started as a free online map developed by Google, it has now transformed into a platform where users can also share their experiences, review destinations and add information about businesses. By developing a Local Guides gamification extension of the maps in 2016, the platform allowed users to share the world on Google Maps while also discovering new places (Kishore, 2019). 
        Its interface consists of an interactive map and a subheading with information about the destination. The information differs whether the user searches for a destination or a particular service. For both, they can access the reviews and photographs of local guides together with an overall score of the location. Users can see a local guide's profile picture, name and the number of reviews they have posted. Upon clicking on their profile, users can read all of the guide's reviews, shared photographs, score in the local guides and their respective level. Based on this information, travellers can evaluate the reviewers and judge their credibility. Google Maps also differs in payment options, since there are no paid reviews on them. Local guides share their information for their intrinsic motivations and do not receive any monetary rewards from anyone. 
        Google Maps is the most used global navigation app, with two-thirds of people with smartphones using it daily. The gamification improvement of Local Guides, a program now used by more than 120 million people, made the platform even more successful. Since Local Guides started, more than 700.000 new places have been added to the community. Google Maps built on the personal and transparent engagement of its users, which is visible also in their continued updates. People will now be able to follow certain Local Guides and will be offered recommendations based on their previous purchases (Sterling, 2019). The minimum age to become a Local Guide in Google Maps is 18 years old. Due to its transparency and possibilities for contributing to the travel community, Google Maps is an interesting platform to include.
           As it is evident from the descriptions of the platforms, they differ in various visual aspects. The differences in design and user interface will be involved in people's perception of user-friendliness of each of these platforms, which can affect their perceived credibility. User experience is a combination of design of the platform, the feeling a user gets when using the platform and the usability of the platform i.e. how user-friendly a platform is (Laugwitz, Held, & Schrepp, 2008). Since different platforms offer different possibilities to review authors, share travel thoughts or rate the usefulness of the advice, I predict that the overall design of the platform and the user interface will influence traveller's perceived trustworthiness and expertise of the reviews. Thus, I want to research whether different user experience influences the perceived credibility of online travel platforms.
           H6: There is a positive relationship between the user experience of a certain online travel platform and traveller's perceived credibility of that platform.
 
           In my research, I will try to include many factors that can influence credibility. Due to a high number of these contributing factors, I have created a model to better understand the connections between them and the corresponding hypotheses testing them. This model can be seen in Figure 2.2. 



Figure 2.2: Research model
	In sum, my study will use the extended TBP model to try and determine the key factors influencing source credibility and whether this perceived credibility does influence travel intention. I posed the first hypothesis to ensure that all of the online travel platforms indeed differ in levels of source credibility and can thus be used in comparison. To test the mediation effect of source credibility on travel intention, I stated the next hypothesis H2. Since eWOM scepticism is lack of trust in the source, and one of source credibility's dimensions is trustworthiness, I predict that their relationship will be inversely proportional. To test the relation, I proposed the H3. As the platforms differ in target groups, website characteristics and more, they will also have different levels of eWOM scepticism. Since Instagram is mostly used for covert promotions and users can have a hidden identity, I predicted that eWOM scepticism will be the highest on it by presenting H4. Not only platforms, but also personal characteristics of travellers can affect their attitude towards the online travel platforms. As a factor, travel involvement has not been researched yet and has been proposed by Casalo et al. (2011) to be tested. The moderation effect of travel involvement on travel intention was examined with H5. Lastly, I needed to acknowledge the differences of the platforms in design and usefulness. Since perceived ease of use and an appealing website can be considered important factors for source credibility as predicted by Casalo et al. (2011), I proposed H6. With this hypothesis I predict that better user experience will have a positive mediation effect on source credibility. By including the factors of user experience, eWOM scepticism, travel involvement and overall source credibility, the study will try and answer the research question. Moreover, it can fill a gap in literature by researching the actual sources of information, not only people's attitudes and reviews on platforms. 

85 3. Methodology
	The overarching goal of the research is to understand which factors of online travel communities most contribute to perceived eWOM credibility and further travel intention. Since the aim to study is to determine people's attitudes and feelings about a particular communication phenomenon, a quantitative study needs to be carried out (Allen, Titsworth & Hunt, 2009). Quantitative studies allow researchers to generalize their findings to bigger populations since they are more representative and objective than qualitative studies. Since my study aims to find relationships between certain phenomena, a quantitative study is necessary. As defined by Aliaga and Gunderson (2002, p. 24), this kind of research deals with "explaining phenomena by collecting numerical data that are analysed using mathematically based methods". Though attitudes and feelings about online travel platforms might not naturally appear as numerical data, by using measuring instruments such as Likert scales, these data can also be analysed with a mathematically based method. Even though the study explores the factors contributing to eWOM credibility and further travel intention, I am not interested in reasons for perceiving them as such. Since understanding why some platforms are perceived differently is not crucial to the study, a qualitative approach is not applicable. Using a quantitative approach also helps achieve neutrality of the analysis and aims at generalizability of the entire population, not only the sample (Muijs, 2004). Lastly, a quantitative approach is needed since the research tries to predict a score of one factor or travel intention from scores of other factors or variables (Muijs, 2004).
        Though quantitative analysis is appropriate for this kind of study, there are some negative aspects of using such research. Firstly, the data collected is limited, with only data concerning the main variables being collected. This limits the scope of the research and does not allow for a holistic and broader understanding of the phenomena. Furthermore, with limited options, quantitative methods tend to generalize and limit human behaviour. By doing so, important additional data can be lost since people perceive their behaviour differently (Allen et al., 2009). Finally, a quantitative study can be perceived as static and closed, not allowing for the flexibility of the process (Muijs, 2004). This can again lead to loss of important data and meanings surrounding the phenomena. 
        Despite the disadvantages of a quantitative study, its methods and processes are the most suitable for the intended research. Since I was testing people's attitudes on three different platforms, I need to control the conditions of the environment that respondents examined. To do so, I conducted an experimental design to purely test the variables in the study. 

85.1 3.1 Choice of method
	As mentioned, my research is trying to fill the gap in the literature by focusing on the importance of online travel communities for travel intention. Since I want to study causation and an explanation of a certain phenomenon (Geuens & Pelsmacker, 2017), my chosen method is an online between-subjects experiment. When comparing experiments to other research methods, it is the best method to test causal relationships, because as the researcher can I define and control every aspect of the observation (Neuman, 2011). This artificial design means that the researcher can incorporate purposive variables based on the literature and study effects that would be hard to observe in a natural setting. Because the study focuses on the influence of independent variable (online travel community) on the dependent variable (travel intention), I conducted an empirically based experiment, testing the effects in a controlled environment, which can be later generalized to the real world (Neuman, 2011).            
           
85.2 3.2 Sampling
	As travel and access to the internet have become more affordable, the number of travellers has risen as with it. In 2019, Eurostat found that three out of five Europeans over the age of 18 travel at least once per year. Moreover, almost 85% of all of the trips are made within Europe. In my research, I wanted to target these 3/5 of the European citizens (Key figures on Europe, 2020). That is, my population is made up of people living or residing in Europe, who are more than 18 years old and of any gender. Furthermore, since the survey is prepared in English, they must have a basic understanding of the language. Their religious, socio-economical and educational background is not a criterion. Though the experiment researched the credibility of travel platforms and requires prior knowledge of chosen platforms, in my population I also included people who may not use certain platforms. Since the destination researched is the island of Tenerife, as explained later, my population does not include anyone living, working or studying there at the time of the survey. For these people, Tenerife is not a tourist destination and their answers could be misleading. 
	Since my population is limited to European citizens above 18 years old, my sample needs to be as representative of it as possible. In Europe in 2019, the ratio between men and women is almost the same. There is 51% of women (229 million) and 49% of men (218 million) (Key figures on Europe, 2020). Consequently, in my sample, I strived to keep the same ratio between respondents. To gain reliable insights, I also tried to reach as many different nationalities as possible. To draw meaningful conclusions from the study, my sample size needed to have enough power to detect effects. In my research, a size of 60 to 80 participants for each travel platform was needed for adequacy (Neuman, 2011). 

85.2.1 3.2.1 Sampling method
           To gather an adequate number of respondents, convenience sampling was applied. Convenience sampling was used due to limited time and resources. It also allowed me to access the respondents with ease (Matthews & Ross, 2010). The gathering of the data was done online since the experiment was designed in Qualtrics application. The survey was in circulation from 14th of May until the 18th of May, 2020. 
           Firstly, I disseminated the questionnaire using an anonymous link in travel groups on Facebook. The post containing the link was posted in 50 different Facebook groups, related to either travel, travelling, exchange of travel reviews or exchange travel-related profiles on various social media platforms. Since most of these groups have strict guidelines on posting, my survey was approved to publish in only 20 groups. Some examples include Travel addiction, traveller reviews, Travel guide and Travel for free. All of these groups operate in the English language, so the understanding of the survey was not an issue. Besides the Facebook groups related to travel, I also published in three survey exchange groups, as well as three subreddit pages dedicated to filling out surveys. The survey was also posted on my own Facebook and Instagram profiles. To reach the younger population of respondents, I disseminated the survey amongst my friends, who then sent it to their friends and colleagues. When asking my friends for help, I explicitly mentioned there were not allowed to fill it out due to validity and credibility concerns. All of them obliged. Dissemination of survey amongst the younger population was especially needed considering young people are leaving Facebook and thusly I was not able to receive their responses through Facebook groups mentioned before (Sweeney, 2018).

85.2.2 3.2.2 Random assignment
	Random assignment was used to divide the respondents into three groups, without systematically differing them based on respondents' characteristics. This unbiased method divided the sample into similar groups, such that each group was shown one of the three travel platforms. Thus the division was unaffected by respondents' interests (Neuman, 2011). This was achieved by using the function 'randomizer' in the Qualtrics programme. At the end of data collection, 55 people reviewed a review on TripAdvisor, 68 saw a review on Instagram and 63 respondents reviewed Google Maps.
	To confirm the between groups similarity based on gender and age, I also conducted Chi-square tests to reassure the results. It revealed that gender is not related to platforms, χ2 (N = 186, 6) = 4.45, p = .616. A Chi-square test also revealed that age is not related to the travel platforms, χ2 (N = 186, 72) = 71.23, p = .503. None of the groups differs in characteristics of gender and age and they are thus comparable.
	The survey was disseminated in the time of COVID-19 crisis, which influenced the answers of 27.3% of respondents according to their judgement. The effect of the pandemic will be discussed later in the validity section.

85.2.3 3.2.3 Description of sample
	A total of 196 responses were recorded by the end of dissemination. During data cleaning, two respondents were identified to live in Tenerife and eight respondents live outside of Europe. Due to their inadequacy, there were omitted from further analysis. In the end, N = 186 responses were included in the analysis. In the sample, a percentage of females was 73.1% and of males 25.8%. 0.5% of respondents identified as other genders and 0.5% did not want to disclose the gender. All of the respondents were included in further analysis. The average age of the respondents was 28.45 (SD=9.81), with the lowest age of 18 and the highest 64. 
        Since my survey was intended for people living in Europe, my respondents had different countries of residence. In total, the respondents lived in 32 different countries. The highest percentage lived in Slovenia (24.7%) and the Netherlands (23.1%), followed by United Kingdom (8.1%), Germany (7.0%) and Italy (5.4%). The rest of the countries had less than 5.0% of the respondents. Most of the respondents obtained a Bachelor's degree (45.2%), followed by a Master's degree (31.2%) and a high school diploma (19.4%). 1.6% of respondents had a Doctoral degree, while 1.1% less than a high school diploma. 1.6% of respondents obtained other forms of education.

85.3 3.3 Operationalization 
	In my research, the independent variables are the chosen online travel platforms: TripAdvisor, Instagram and Google Maps. The dependant variable is travel intention. The research included three mediators (eWOM scepticism, user experience and source credibility) and one moderator (travel involvement). 

85.3.1 3.3.1 Independent variables online travel platforms
	In my experiment, independent variables were online travel platforms or communities TripAdvisor, Instagram and Google Maps. To make them appear as realistic as possible in the survey, they were adapted to look like real posts on the respective platform (visible in Appendix B). To assure that no other characteristics besides the look of the platforms influence respondents, I used the same picture and travel review of the island of Tenerife. These two stimuli were chosen based on the pre-test, which I explain in the next section. I also changed the name of the user and its profile picture with random AI-generated photo of a woman on all three platforms. These published reviews were created using 'review' function on respective websites. For every platform, the necessary elements were changed to control the review. This way I was able to control all of the elements of the review while maintaining the authenticity and design of each platform without creating it artificially in a design program. 
	To manipulate the review on Instagram, I changed the location of the photo with my chosen destination, changed the name of a person visible on the bottom of the picture and blurred the profile picture of the person who liked the post. I mainly did that to prevent followers from being identified. 
	The review on TripAdvisor was also manipulated to appear more helpful. Firstly, I changed the name of the location, both the beach and the island. Next, I changed the rating of the review into five stars, to appear as believable and reliable. Lastly, I changed the number of likes and saves to the same number as on the Instagram platform, to reduce the differences between communities as much as possible. 
	The review on Google Maps was also given five stars to reduce the difference between platforms. I changed the number of reviews the user wrote to make her more believable and authentic, as well as naming her the local guide to give her more credibility. 

85.3.2 3.3.2 Dependent variable travel intention
           To measure travel intention, I used the adapted scales from a questionnaire based on the theory of planned behaviour, develop by Lam and Hsu (2006), as well as survey questions regarding following the advice from an online travel community by Casalo et al. (2011). 
           Lam and Hsu (2006) designed the scale to test the likelihood of choosing Hong Kong as the next travel destination. In my research, the questionnaire was adapted to fit my destination in the online review and to apply it to online travel communities. The dimensions tested in the original survey were: behavioural intention, attitude, behavioural belief, subjective norm, normative norm, perceived behavioural control, control beliefs and past behaviour, the components of TPB. Since I am only researching behavioural beliefs and thus attitude towards the destination to predict travel intention, I only included questions regarding beliefs and behavioural intention. Based on the construction of the TPB model, behavioural beliefs (Cronbach's α = .76, M = 3.44, SD = 0.77) are measured using the two components: "perceived likelihood of the outcomes of the behaviour and evaluation of those outcomes" (Lam & Hsu, 2006, p. 593). Together they consist of six items, measured on a five-point Likert scale from strongly agree to strongly disagree. The behavioural beliefs were adapted for the chosen destination and to the activities mentioned in the final review, chosen by a pre-test. The beliefs tested were thus: to experience warm weather, to visit water parks, to enjoy the nightlife, to go shopping, to go sightseeing and to relax on beaches. Behavioural intention (Cronbach's α = .84, M = 4.06, SD = 1.41) consisted of three items, all measured on a five-point Likert scale from strongly agree to strongly disagree (Lam & Hsu, 2006). It was adapted to better fit with the research. The destination was changed in every item to fit with my online review presented, such as in an item for behavioural intention 'intend to visit Tenerife in next 12 months'. 
           To explain travel intention based on information gathered in the online travel community, I also included survey questions by Casalo et al. (2011), who developed a scale especially measuring the multidimensionality of following the advice in online travel communities. In their scale, they test the following dimensions: usefulness, honesty, benevolence, competence, attitude, intention to follow the advice, and susceptibility to interpersonal influence. To complement the items from Lam and Hsu's (2006) survey, I only included the dimensions of attitude (Cronbach's α = .91, M = 2.75, SD = 0.92) and intention to follow the advice on a platform (Cronbach's α = .76, M = 3.74, SD = 0.72). The items from both dimensions were measured on a five-point Likert scale from strongly agree to strongly disagree. For the dimension of attitude, I included items such as 'I think following the advice obtained in this online travel community would be good for me', and for the dimension of intention, an item such as 'I would feel comfortable behaving according to the advice I obtain in the online travel community' was used.

85.3.3 3.3.3 Variable source credibility
           One of the mediators in my experiment is source credibility. There are two dimensions for measuring source credibility: trustworthiness and expertise. Trustworthiness refers to the "degree of confidence in the communicator's intent to communicate the assertions he/she considers most valid" (Ohanian, 1990, p. 41). Trustworthiness, therefore, defines the extent to which the source can be trusted or not (Ohanian, 1990). Another dimension is expertise, defined by Ohanian (1990) as "the extent to which a communicator is perceived to be a source of valid assertions" (p. 41). To evaluate the source's expertise, it can be assessed by the aspects of knowledge, experience and skills (Dou et al., 2012). In sum, the consumer needs to assess whether the reviewer is capable of making a correct and valid review. To measure source credibility of online travel communities, I adapted the scale that measured celebrity endorsers' perceived expertise, trustworthiness and attractiveness by Ohanian (1990). Since the Ohanian's scale was created to measure the source credibility of people, whereas my study focuses on products, the dimension of attractiveness was deducted from the scale. This does not affect the validity of the scale since Ohanian (1990) suggests using an adapted scale to predict a consumer's attitude towards a product and their intention to buy the product. In my survey, I thus only included the dimensions of expertise (Cronbach's α = .83, M = 2.93, SD = 0.67) and trustworthiness (Cronbach's α = .89, M = 3.37, SD = 0.81). The expertise was measured using five items on a five-point semantic differential scale, such as 'qualified/unqualified' and 'skilled/unskilled'. The dimension of trustworthiness was also tested using a five-point semantic differential scale of five items, including 'dependable/undependable, and 'reliable/unreliable'. To conduct my analysis, I used a combined version of the scale named source credibility (Cronbach's α = .87, M = 3.15, SD = 0.62).

85.3.4 3.3.4 Mediating variable eWOM scepticism
           A mediator of the experiment is eWOM scepticism. It has three dimensions: the truthfulness of the message, motives of the message senders and identities of the message senders. Though the dimensions might not fit together theoretically, they are correlated with each other and have been shown to affect consumers at different levels. They were defined and tested by Zhang et al. (2016) when creating a new scale to measure scepticism towards electronic word-of-mouth. Each of the dimensions has three items. Since I do not measure eWOM scepticism towards the message, but towards the online travel platform, the items in the scale needed to be adapted accordingly. I assembled the original items from the Zhang et al. (2016) scale with their corresponding adjusted items included in my experiment. An example of the items for truthfulness (Cronbach's α = .67, M = 2.88, SD = 0.78) is 'online reviews on this online travel platform are not generally truthful', for motivation (Cronbach's α = .77, M = 2.68, SD = 0.88), an example is 'most online reviews on this online travel platform are intended to mislead' and an example for identity (Cronbach's α = .79, M = 3.02, SD = 0.83) is 'people writing reviews on this online travel platform are pretending they are someone else. All the items were measured using a five-point Likert scale from strongly agree to strongly disagree (Zhang et al., 2016). Though I acknowledge that the Cronbach's α for truthfulness is low, I decided to keep it since it is also included in the original scale to measure eWOM scepticism. Since the omission of any item does not improve its reliability, I kept all of the three items tested in the survey. When testing eWOM scepticism in analysis, I used the combined scale of truthfulness, identity and motivation. Since the new scale eWOM scepticism (Cronbach's α = .85, M = 2.86, SD = 0.69) was also reliable, it supported my decision to keep the truthfulness scale despite lower reliability.  

85.3.5 3.3.5 Mediating variable user experience
	Being innovative and competitive in the market is no longer enough to have a successful product or service. In today's digital world, users expect that even the most complicated and complex online experiences are simple and satisfactory (Schrepp, Hinderks, & Thomaschewski, 2017). Since online travel communities are subjected to the same standards by future and regular travellers, they must also comply with the six dimensions of user experience. User experience will act as a mediator to platform credibility. The six dimensions are, based on the User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ), developed by German researchers Laugwitz et al. in 2008, the following: attractiveness, perspicuity, efficiency, dependability, stimulation and novelty. Since the original questionnaire is long and too detailed for the purposes of my research, I used its shortened version, developed by Schrepp et al. in 2017. This survey includes eight items, capturing the essence of the original questionnaire (Cronbach's α = .83, M = 3.62, SD = 0.60). These eight items were used in my experiment to the test user experience amongst travellers, such as 'obstructive/supportive' and 'clear/confusing'. Questions were presented on a five-point semantic differential scale.

85.3.6 3.3.6 Moderating variable travel involvement
	A moderator in my analysis is enduring travel involvement since it is the most permanent and travel-based construct amongst travel involvement. It is established on the "perceived relevance of travel to the individual" (Ferns & Walls, 2012, p. 28). According to the TPB, enduring travel involvement can be a predictor of a traveller's behaviour, since it helps develop and maintain attitudes towards destinations and travel. When a person is involved in travel, it has been shown to have a direct effect on travel intentions (Ferns & Walls, 2012). Travellers who are highly involved consider travel as important, enjoyable and central to their lives. Based on TPB, they will always try to maintain their attitude in line with their behaviour (Ferns & Walls, 2012). To test travellers' involvement, I used an adapted scale by Ferns and Walls (2012), which tests people's attitudes towards pleasure travel (Cronbach α = .95, M = 4.38, SD = 0.88). It consisted of five items measured on a five-point semantic differential scale. Such items are 'for me, travel is important/unimportant' and 'for me, travel is significant/insignificant'. 
        To determine the travel behaviour of the sample, I divided travel involvement variable into high- and low-involved travellers based on Me = 4.80. My sample included 47.3% low-involved travellers, where N = 25 were men and N = 62 were women. Of 52.7% high-involved travellers, N = 23 were men and N = 74 were women. 

85.4 3.4 Research design and data collection
85.4.1 3.4.1 Pre-test 
	In an experimental design, it is highly recommended to conduct a pre-test before data collection.  For the purposes of my research, I will conduct a pre-test to better develop my stimuli. Developing a valid and reliable stimulus is at outmost importance when experimenting since it needs to be unambiguous and understandable to everyone. It must also appear realistic while being at the same time under the control of the researcher (Geuens & Pelsmacker, 2017). Due to this, I used real reviews in the pre-test, chosen by specific rules, explained in the next paragraphs. This made the online review seem competent and authentic, while at the same time controlling the desired outcome. To ascertain that the review appeared authentic in any chosen platform, I also tested the authenticity and believability of each text for every platform. Before pre-test, I had manipulated real Instagram, Google Maps and TripAdvisor reviews with the chosen texts. Every review was also accompanied by the same picture, to minimize its effect. 
        The outcome needed from this pre-test was to select a text of the review and an accompanying picture. Including only these two components kept the pre-test as simple as possible.
        The pre-test was conducted in a respondent-driven way. Since my population consists of anyone involved with travel over 18 years old from Europe, the pre-test was conducted on friends and colleagues. To reach a wider audience, I also distributed the pre-test amongst my parents' and grandparents' friends, encompassing an older audience. By distributing pre-test to different people outside my circle, it covered different subgroups of my population. This ensured that views of different groups are visible, and at the same time allowed for potential issues to arise (Geuens & Pelsmacker, 2017). Since the survey was disseminated mostly amongst Slovenians whose first language is not English, some of them struggled with the terminology used in the survey. Mostly they pointed out the lack of knowledge on the meaning of the word ambiguous. The questions in the pre-test with the word ambiguous could have thusly be answered incorrectly.
        The pre-test comprised of an introduction to the study and an explanation of what is needed from the respondents. It also included my gratitude for their participation and highlighted the importance of their answers, as well as the pre-test for my research (Geuens & Pelsmacker, 2017).
             The survey was administered in the spring of 2020, between the 1st of May and the 4th of May. During the distribution, the survey was never changed. 
           After the dissemination, a total of 37 responses were gathered. After the data cleaning, further analysis included N = 37. Among the respondents, there were 32.4% men and 67.6% women. In the pre-test, the respondents did not state their age but their year of birth. Due to this, the variable age had to be created. I transformed the variable 'year of birth' using 'recode into different variables' so that each year corresponded with the person's age in the year 2020. The average age of the respondents was 34.01 (SD = 12.37). The minimum age was 19 and the maximum was 70. All of the respondents received some form of higher education. 21.6% were high school graduates, 40.5% had a Bachelor's degree and 37.8% had a Master's degree.

85.4.2 3.4.2 Pre-test of potential stimuli
	Before conducting the experiment, I needed to determine the travel review that can be used to test travel intention. This review was then used in different travel communities, meaning that the online review appeared as either written on Instagram, TripAdvisor or Google Maps. Stimulus elements were selected so the online review is compelling and understandable, while at the same time contain an unambiguous message about a popular travel destination. 
           As mentioned, my pre-test tested two different confounding variables: text of an online review and the picture. To achieve the desired manipulation stimulus, I tried to find and elaborate on every part of it (Geuens & Pelsmacker, 2017). My decisions and chosen stimuli elements are explained below.
           Even though negative reviews are more valuable and less ambiguous (Weitzl et al., 2016), I used a predominantly positive review. Weitzl et al. (2016, p. 353) consider the higher value of negative reviews due to its predominantly less ambiguous perception amongst people since they are "more diagnostic of the character of an entity." Since destinations with negative reviews mainly avert people from visiting it, travel intention in those cases is negative or non-existent. Positive reviews about destinations are also more common on travel platforms and promote destinations. This is also supported by Weitzl et al. (2016) who argue that only positive reviews have an effect on credibility when describing experience goods, such as travelling. Moreover, Lee et al. (2011) explain that reviews are the most effective when they appear as both positive and negative, balancing both perspectives and being seemingly unbiased. Consequently, a positive review was needed to assure that people would not be negatively influenced by it while still incorporating a negative viewpoint. It is also necessary to include both perspectives to avoid respondents' perspective of paid or fake reviewing.
           To find the right review for my pre-test, I searched for real, already shared travel reviews in online travel communities. This assured that they appear authentic and genuine. When choosing the reviews to test, I also strived to include mid-length reviews, as they show expertise, while also considering their grammatical accuracy and appropriate travel jargon (O'Reilly et al., 2016). A review abiding by these standards simulates expertise and trustworthiness, almost guaranteeing the credibility of the message. 
        The travel reviews tested are written about the Canary Islands, more specifically the island Tenerife. I chose this part of the world since it is the most visited region of Europe by European Union citizens. According to EUROSTAT, Spain was the most visited foreign destination for EU citizens in 2017, receiving more than 20% of all outbound tourists in Europe ("Tourism statistics - top destinations - Statistics Explained", 2020). Moreover, in 2017, the Canary Islands were the most visited region of Europe, hosting more than 100 million nights in tourist accommodation, with more than 90% of those tourists visiting from other EU countries ("Key figures on Europe", 2020). 
        As mentioned in the previous chapter, defining the destination is also crucial when testing travel intention. Since the Canary Islands as a destination is too broad, I decided to focus on the island Tenerife, since it is the most populated and the most popular of all of the islands according to several travel pages (TUI, Lonely Planet, and TripAdvisor). Focusing on a more specific destination or attraction such as a hotel or a beach would emanate confusion or failure to recognize a destination, leading to lower credibility and further lower travel intention.
        These facts are important when choosing a destination reviewed in the experiment since I wanted to guarantee travel intention among people. The more likely the destination is visited, the more feasible it is that the majority of people will also travel there since the message is only effective when it has relevance for the receiver (O'Reilly et al., 2016). Even if respondents already travelled there, March and Woodside (2005) found that behaviour is positively influenced by past behaviour. If they had pleasant experiences, that would consequently increase their travel intention. By choosing a popular tourist destination, I also assured the sufficiency of travel reviews written about it. Since I used real-life travel reviews to conduct the pre-test, this factor is extremely important.
         In the pre-test, the importance of disclosing the source of online travel review will not be tested. Since reviewer profiles are the most useful and reliable sources of information on online travel platforms (Shan, 2016), this stimulus was predetermined. The author of the review was provided, appearing as a knowledgeable and trustworthy traveller. This was done to avoid the loss of credibility due to anonymity and to assure that the message is fully accepted by the respondents. When the credibility of the author is high, the message is also perceived as of higher quality and validity (Weitzl et al., 2016). 
           Finally, an important aspect of the online review enabled by all three online travel platforms in the picture. Based on the research by Stackla, almost two-thirds of all participants said that they reference pictures on social review sites when researching travel destinations and 54% do that on social networks (Degruttola, 2019). Choosing the right picture is thus as important as choosing the right text of the online review. According to Stackla, 89% of respondents would post about a positive experience with a destination. Moreover, more than half of them have made plans after seeing a user-generated photo on social media platforms (Degruttola, 2019). Though Lian and Yu (2019) found that there is no significant difference between UGC and professional photo content provided by hotels or agencies, they acknowledge that people trust more the photos by other people than posted by official websites of destinations. This is especially true when they perceive the source (author) as credible. This criterion was met in my pre-test. Moreover, they identify that a positive direction of an image has a greater influence on travel intention than negative (Lian and Yu, 2019). Since my review is predominantly positive, these criteria are also met. 
           Lastly, it is important to consider what kind of photo of the location will be included in the final questionnaire. To test which photo would be the most appealing to future travellers, I included eight different photos in the pre-test. The pictures encompass different perspectives of the island while looking like UGC pictures. Two photos represent the nature and scenery, where one focuses on the mountains and the other on the coastal part of Tenerife. Next, four photos focus on the activities one can experience on the island. One is the city, which represents culture and architecture, one is of a group of friends in a water park, one showcases Tenerife's traditional dish and the last a building, showing the culture and architecture of the island. Lastly, respondents can choose either a picture of a beach with a family or a girl. By choosing these particular photos, I include the most famous parts of the island, the most popular activities and give travellers an opportunity of choosing a picture with or without people. The picture that the majority of respondents of the pre-test choose as the most appealing one will be added to the reviews on online travel platforms.  

85.4.3 3.4.3 Pre-test results 
	Based on the aforementioned characteristics, I had to find a mostly positive, mid-length review that is unambiguous, clear and understandable to everyone. To determine this, I computed the means of each of the variables tested in the survey. The orientation of the review was calculated on a scale of 1 to 10, with 1 being negative and 10 being positive. The length of the review was also measured on a 10 point scale, with 1 being too short and 10 being too long. Ambiguity, understandability and clarity of the review were measured on a 5-point Likert scale from 'not at all' to 'a great deal'. The means of all five variables can be seen in Table 3.1.

Table 3.1: Difference among six tested reviews based on several characteristics (mean)
REVIEW / respective 
pre-test question numberOrientation of the reviewLength of the reviewAmbiguity of the reviewUnderstandability of the reviewClarity of the review1 - Q46.324.572.763.973.652 - Q127.194.762.354.304.143 - Q165.786.222.973.513.304 - Q206.763.862.593.893.785 - Q247.354.812.513.843.736 - Q288.545.621.954.544.657 - Q326.543.142.733.973.68
	As seen in Table 3.1, review number six was the most adequate review. It was the most positive, yet not too much. According to Weitzl et al. (2016), positive reviews can be open to multiple different interpretations and are more common than negative ones. Since the review needs to be positive as to achieve positive travel intention, it should not be overly favourable. This could make it suspicious and unethical. The length of the chosen review is close to five (mid-length) and has the lowest score of ambiguity. Furthermore, it has the highest score of understandability and clarity of the review. Based on these variables it makes it the most appropriate review to use in the final survey.
        In my experiment, I used three different platforms, each with their characteristics. Since the same review will be presented on all of them, I wanted to assure that the reviews appear authentic and believable to the respondents. To research that, I prepared prototype reviews with a random review for each platform. I tested their authenticity and believability on a 5-point Likert scale from 'not at all' to 'a great deal'. To understand people's perceptions of the reviews, I first calculated the means of each variable for Instagram, Google Maps and TripAdvisor. They can be seen in Table 3.2

Table 3.2: Difference among platforms on authenticity and believability (mean)
PlatformBelievableAuthentic TripAdvisor3.783.35Instagram3.843.73Google Maps3.923.84
	It is evident from Table 3.2 that all of the reviews mostly appear believable and authentic on all three platforms since the means are on the positive side of the scale. To confirm the between groups similarity of means, I also conducted a repeated measures ANOVA test to reassure the results. This ANOVA test with a Greenhouse-Geisser correction determined that mean believability did not differ statistically significantly between the online travel platforms (F (1.59, 57.35) = 0.03, p = .660). Moreover, repeated measures ANOVA with Sphericity Assumed determined that mean authenticity differed statistically between all three travel platforms (F (2, 72) = 3.91, p = .025). This concludes that none of the platforms significantly differs from others in terms of believability, while authenticity is significantly different between them. 
	Lastly, I wanted to determine the picture accompanying the review. In the survey, people had to indicate which picture out of 8 appealed to them the most. The pictures can be seen in Appendix A. As it is apparent from Table 3.3, N=16 chose picture 8, which is the highest number. Based on this answer, picture 8 will be used in the experiment. 

Table 3.3:  Picture preference of respondents in a pre-test
Picture number 12345678Number of respondents1211024116
85.5 3.5 Validity and reliability
	In my research, I aimed to predict which online travel platforms, if any, induce travel intention amongst travellers based on several characteristics of these platforms. To conduct valid research, the sample had to be representative of the population. Based on the population I determined, my sample was somewhat representative of it. Instead of including an equal ratio of men and women, only one-fourth of the respondents were male. Therefore, the results can differ from the results of the population. All of the respondents were indeed more than 18 years old and represented 32 nationalities. Since there are 44 countries in Europe, I managed to reach more than 72% of all countries. Though not all of them are presented equally, the percentage is still high enough to draw meaningful conclusions. Furthermore, all platforms except TripAdvisor had enough power to detect effects. Despite TripAdvisor not reaching the set goal, it still had enough respondents to include in the analysis. 
	The sample should also be generalized with caution in regards to age. Since the median age of Europeans is 43 years old (Romei, 2020) and my median was 25, there is a significant difference in the age range between both. Though the results may not be representative of the entire population of Europe, they can give insight into the behavioural intention of younger populations. The age of the sample is especially crucial to consider when attempting to discuss the results of the experiment for each platform since the younger generation tend to use different platforms than older ones.
        Furthermore, for external validity, a comparison of the demographics of the platforms with the demographic profile of each platform in the survey is needed. In my sample, the age group from 18 to 34 years old comprised 41.0% of all respondents who were shown the review on Instagram. Moreover, the age group of 25 to 34 years old was represented in 34.4%. These numbers roughly coincide with the age groups on Instagram in real life. The comparison of users for the other two platforms is not possible since there is no defined demographic profile for them.
        Since the sampling method was convenience sampling, results are also less generalizable from the perspective of travel involvement. As the survey was mostly disseminated in travel groups, my sample can have higher overall travel involvement than population. 
        The results must also be interpreted with caution since the survey was disseminated in the time of COVID-19 pandemic, which greatly influenced the tourism industry. When asked, 27.3% of respondents admitted that their answers were affected by these circumstances. Despite their judgement, the results are still valid due to random assignment. It assured that an even number of respondents was shown each online travel platform and that their characteristics did not influence that decision. By using random assignment, it is ensured that the number of people affected by the pandemic is the same in every group. Though the travel intention in each group might, therefore, be lower due to this influence, it is equally lower across all platforms. The results are thus equally reliable and valid.
        To assure people recognize the platforms on which the review was shown and respond adequately, a manipulation check of independent variable was included. At the end of the survey, the respondents were asked to identify the platform. Respondents who were shown a review on TripAdvisor correctly identified it in 92.7%. 3.6% thought the review was published on Google Maps and 1.8% thought it was published on Instagram. People who were shown the review on Instagram correctly identified it in 97.1%. The rest, 2.9% of respondents thought it was written on TripAdvisor. Lastly, 88.9% of respondents correctly identified Google Maps as their shown platform. 7.9% thought the correct platform was TripAdvisor and 3.2% that it was Instagram. Since the majority of respondents in each group correctly answered the manipulation check, the results can be used in the analysis.
        The external validity of this experiment is medium since the sample can be somewhat generalized to the population as a whole, but the results may not be generalizable across different settings, making ecological validity intermediate. 
        To measure the main concepts, already existing and previously established scales were used for all of the variables. For a unidimensional dependant variable travel intention, two reliable scales used in two different pieces of research were used to assure valid results. Though both scales were developed recently, behavioural intention scale (Lam & Hsu, 2006) could be considered a bit outdated since only TripAdvisor existed at the time of its formulation. Despite this, the scale is not directly connected to online travel platforms, so it is valid to use it. Since both scales were used for measuring travel intention, they were both measuring the intended concept. Both scales were also determined reliable, to follow advice on a platform scale (Casalo et al., 2011) with acceptable internal consistency, and behavioural intention scale with good internal consistency. 
        To measure multidimensional variable source credibility, a scale from 1990 was used (Ohanian, 1990). Since the scale was used to measure the source credibility of people, the attractiveness sub-scale was omitted, making the scale less valid. Since the scale was not meant to measure services and is somewhat outdated, it was assessed with caution during the analysis. Despite its scarcity, the scale is general and still prevailing, which is why I decided to use it in my research. Furthermore, both sub-scales and the final combined scale were determined as having good internal consistency, supporting my decision to keep it in the analysis.
        The multidimensional variable eWOM scepticism was measured using a recently created and validated scale (Zhang et al., 2016). The scale had to be adapted to measure scepticism towards the platform and not the message, resulting in a less valid scale. This was also shown in the internal consistency of sub-scales, where the truthfulness had a questionable one. Since all of the levels measured with subscales are necessary for measuring eWOM scepticism and removal of one of the items did not contribute to higher reliability, I decided to keep the sub-scale in the analysis. My decision was also supported by the good internal consistency of the combined scale. Moreover, the scale did measure the intended concept and can thus be considered as valid.
        To compute unidimensional travel involvement of travellers I used a scale of enduring travel involvement (Ferns & Walls, 2012) that measures feelings towards pleasure travel. In the survey, the validated version was used, making it a valid to use. The scale also proved to be reliable with excellent internal consistency. 
        Lastly, unidimensional variable user experience was also measured using the already existing scale (Schrepp et al., 2017). In the survey, I used already validated the shorter version of the scale without changing any of the items. The scale was thus valid and reliable, based on its internal validity which resulted to be good.
        My study included numerous variables and tested the relationships between them. In some cases, a causal effect was considered when testing. Concerning online travel platforms, they were always approached as a definite cause in the experiment. Particularly, the independent variable travel platforms was a cause for travel intention, as well as different levels of source credibility. Since there are a clear correlation and time order, causality exists (Chambliss, 2006). Furthermore, some of these variables also had other causes. For instance, source credibility also had user experience as a cause, since the look of the website can influence trustworthiness and expertise of a platform and there was a clear correlation between them. 
        An experiment offers great control and with it the responsibility of assuring that every variable is accounted for. In my research, confounding variables age and gender were accounted for and identified equally distributed amongst all platforms without significant influence. The dependant variable was measured with two different scales to achieve maximum validity. By distributing pre-test to people who were not allowed to fill out the survey I also assured that there was no influence of first to latter. Lastly, all of the confounding variables of online travel platforms as independent variables were accounted for and tested before the experiment by conducting a pre-test. By adhering to all these measures I ensured that the internal validity of the experiment was high.

85.6 3.6 Method of data analysis
	After collecting the data in Qualtrics application, I downloaded and analysed it in SPSS program. The results of the analyses are presented in the next chapter.

86 4. Results
	Before conducting the analysis I needed to assure that the continuous scales used in my survey were normally distributed. To determine their normal distribution I referred to kurtosis and skewness indicators. Since normality significance tests greatly depend on sample size and visual analysis, such as histograms and Normal Q-Q plots are subjective, only these two descriptive statistics were taken into account. Almost all continuous variables are normally distributed, except for intention to follow advice on a platform. For this dependant variable, the kurtosis was above the recommended guidelines of -3 to +3. Kurtosis for this travel intention was 4.74. Though it does deviate from normality, the score is not too astray to omit from the analysis. In the analysis, I will also include results for each platform individually as well as for the model in general. By doing so, I want to get a deeper and clearer understanding into the perception of platforms and possibly uncover factors influencing respondents' decision I had not taken into account and that could help recommendations for further research.  

H1: The researched online travel platforms differ in levels of credibility. 
	To test H1, source credibility was measured for each platform and compared using ANOVA. The analysis revealed a significant main effect for the online travel communities TripAdvisor, Instagram and Google Maps on their level of source credibility, F(2,183) = 12.25, p < .001, partial η2 = .12. Tukey post-hoc comparisons revealed that Instagram is significantly less credible (M = 2.87, SD = 0.65) than TripAdvisor (M = 3.27, SD = 0.51), 
p = .001, and less credible than Google Maps (M = 3.34, SD = 0.57), p < .001. 
	H1 is confirmed, since platforms do differ in levels of source credibility. 

H2: The higher the credibility of the online travel community, the greater the travel intention.
H3: With the higher scepticism in an online travel community, the travel intention will be lower
	To test both hypotheses, a linear multiple regression was conducted, with the intention to follow advice on a platform as a criterion. Predictors were eWOM scepticism and source credibility. The model was found to be significant, F(2, 183) = 11.28, p < 0.001, R2 = .11. Only source credibility was found to be a significant predictor (β = .257, p = .002), while eWOM scepticism (β = -.12, p = .142) was not significant for intention to follow advice on a platform. 
	Further, a linear multiple regression was conducted, with behavioural intention as a criterion. Predictors were eWOM scepticism and source credibility. The model was again found to be significant, F(2, 183) = 9.27, p < 0.001, R2 = .09. Only source credibility was found to be a significant predictor (β = .33, p < .001), while eWOM scepticism (β = .07, 
p = .410) was not significant for behavioural intention. 
	To explain the overall mediation model I will also test the effect of eWOM scepticism on source credibility. To assess this, I will perform a simple linear regression, with source credibility as criterion and eWOM scepticism as a predictor. The model turned out to be significant, F(1, 184) = 58.86, p < .001, R2 = .24. eWOM scepticism was found to be significant predictor (β = -.49, p < .001) for source credibility. The higher the eWOM scepticism, the lower source credibility. 
	Based on these findings, I accept H2 and reject H3.

H4: The eWOM scepticism will be the highest on Instagram.
	The comparison of eWOM scepticism on different platforms was analysed using ANOVA. The test revealed a significant main effect of platforms on eWOM scepticism, F(2,183) = 19.51, p < .001, partial η2 = .18. Tukey post-hoc comparison revealed that Instagram has significantly higher eWOM scepticism (M = 3.23, SD = 0.66) than TripAdvisor (M = 2.73, SD = 0.67), p < .001, and Google Maps (M = 2.58, SD = 0.56), p < .001. 
	H4 is confirmed since Instagram does have the highest eWOM scepticism. 

H5: High-involved travellers show higher travel intention when the online travel community is perceived as credible.
	To test whether travel involvement has a moderation effect on travel intention when online travel platforms are considered credible, both independent variables of source credibility and travel involvement were centralized. The new variables were then multiplied to compute a new variable 'interaction'. Moderation was then tested using multiple regression with behavioural intention as a criterion. Predictors were centralized variable source credibility, centralized variable travel involvement and interaction. The model was found to be significant, F(3, 182) = 7.17, p < .001, R2 = .11. Only centralized variable source credibility was found to be a significant predictor of behavioural intention (β = .26, p = .001), while neither centralized variable travel involvement (β = .15, p = .082) nor the interaction effect (β = .02, p = .782) were found significant for behavioural intention.
	To assure the analysis was correct, I performed the same test using intention to follow advice on a platform as a criterion, with the same variables for predictors. The model was found to be significant, F(3, 182) = 8.09, p < .001, R2 = .12. Centralized variable source credibility was again found as the only significant predictor of intention to follow advice on a platform (β = .28, p < .001), while neither centralized variable travel involvement (β = .15, 
p = .078) nor interaction (β = .01, p = .892) were found significant for intention to follow advice on a platform. 
	Travel involvement does not moderate the effect of credibility on travel intention, thus I reject H5.

H6: There is a positive relationship between user experience of a certain online travel platform and traveller's perceived credibility of that platform.
	A simple linear regression with source credibility of an online travel platform as a criterion and user experience as a predictor was conducted. The model was found to be significant, F(1, 184) = 38.39, p < .001, R2 = .17. Better user experience does have a positive influence on the source credibility of online travel platforms (β = .41, p < .001). 
	To test the relation between both variables for each platform separately, a simple regression was used. The test with source credibility of TripAdvisor as a criterion and user experience as a predictor was conducted. The model was found to be significant, F(1, 53) = 50.56, p < .001, R2 = .49. Better user experience on TripAdvisor has a positive influence on the source credibility of this online travel platform (β = .70, p < .001). 
	Simple regression with source credibility of Instagram as a criterion and user experience as a predictor was conducted. The model was found to be significant, F(1, 66) = 5.22, p = .026, R2 = .07. Better user experience on Instagram has a positive influence on the source credibility of this online travel platform (β = .27, p = .026). 
	Simple regression with source credibility of Google Maps as a criterion and user experience as a predictor was conducted. The model was found to be significant, F(1, 61) = 22.50, p < .001, R2 = .27. Better user experience on Google Maps has a positive influence on the source credibility of this online travel platform (β = .52, p < .001). 
	To research which platform has the best user experience, an ANOVA test was also conducted. It revealed a significant main effect of platforms on user experience, F(2,183) = 3.12, p = .047, partial η2 = .03. Tukey post-hoc comparison revealed that no platform has significantly better user experience than others. Though the differences are not significant, the platforms do differ in the means of their evaluated user experience, as seen in table 4.1.

Table 4.1: Differences among the evaluation of the user experience of platforms (mean)
PlatformMean TripAdvisor3.46Instagram3.68Google Maps3.71	
	H6 is confirmed, since user experience has a positive effect on source credibility on every online travel platform. 

87 5. conclusion
	Online travel communities have, for a long time, been overlooked in the literature. Their importance has only recently started to be recognized in research and tourism industry. With the growing number of such platforms and the reviews published on them, receiving clear and authentic recommendations is more difficult than ever (Lee et al., 2011). That is why travellers have started putting more emphasis on the communities to gain reliable information, and less on the actual reviews written by other travellers (Dou et al., 2012). As has been shown by Casalo et al. (2011), trust in online travel communities does have a positive influence on travel intention. In my research I wanted to expand on these findings to understand what is it about online travel platforms that make people confide in them and convince them to travel, using the theory of planned behaviour as a framework. With my research question, I thus wanted to find certain characteristics that distinguish platforms from one another in credibility and increase travel intention. This was done using base constructs (attitude, behavioural intention, intention to follow advice on a platform, source credibility) and additional explanatory factors (eWOM scepticism, travel involvement, user experience).
           Firstly, I needed to define whether the chosen platforms do differ in levels of credibility. I tested this assumption with H1, which was confirmed. Each platform had a different level of source credibility, with Instagram having significantly the lowest one. Since source credibility is greatly dependant on the reputation of the community, these results are in line with current literature and insights into platforms. Source credibility also depends on the trustworthiness and expertise of the community. Instagram as a platform is not specifically dedicated to travel-related content as the other two communities, which can influence its perceived expertise. People posting on Instagram may not be experienced travellers and since no proof is required, might even review destinations they had never visited. This aspect also influences its trustworthiness. Moreover, trust can be lessened by firm-generated hidden or false advertising and paid promotions (Moran & Muzellec, 2017), which is prevalent on social networking sites such as Instagram.
           In previous research, source credibility has been determined as an important predictor of eWOM's effectiveness. It has been confirmed that higher credibility of a product has a direct positive influence on purchase behaviour (Weitzl et al., 2016). In my experiment, this connection was tested with H2, which was also confirmed. Source credibility does have a positive influence on travel intention. Moreover, source credibility was shown as influential in both behavioural intention and intention to follow advice on a platform. This determined that not only attitude toward the target behaviour but also toward the object of evaluation is influenced by source credibility. Furthermore, the relationship also established that the behaviour was precisely defined, as suggested by the findings of Yuzhanin and Fisher (2016). When considering the effect of source credibility on travel intention for each platform, Google Maps was the only platform with no effect for both intentions. The lack of effect does not necessarily mean source credibility does not matter, but rather that regarding Google Maps, it does not make any difference on its influence.
           By now it has been established that source credibility shows how much people trust certain travel communities, as one of its dimensions is trustworthiness. Therefore, if source credibility is low, distrust or eWOM scepticism could be an influencing factor. It lowers the credibility and further travel intention. Though eWOM scepticism has been identified to affect consumer's intentions, it has never been researched in terms of travel. In H3 I thus wanted to establish whether eWOM scepticism will negatively influence travel intention. The hypothesis was rejected. The factor was shown insignificant considering behavioural intention and effective when testing on the intention to follow advice on a platform. The lack of effect on target behaviour could be explained by the choice of destination and clearly defined target behaviour. Since the destination was chosen based on several factors specifically measured on the European population, it was so compelling that eWOM scepticism could not alter their decision to travel there. 
           Since behavioural intention does not account for the object of evaluation, such as travel platforms (Ajzen, 1985), no eWOM scepticism of the platforms was accounted for. This relationship was explained in the associated finding on the significance of eWOM scepticism on the intention to follow advice on a platform. Here, the destination was no longer as important and higher attention was given to the origin of recommendation. The effect has extensively been researched (Zhang et al., 2016) and this finding now supports the theory in tourism as well. 
           From H2 and H3 we infer that source credibility and eWOM scepticism are both present on every online travel platform and that they have a contradictive effect on travel intention. This was also identified by linear regression which showed that with higher eWOM scepticism, source credibility is lower. Based on these findings, I wanted to compare levels of source credibility with levels of eWOM scepticism for each platform. Conducting the analysis on each platform confirmed this finding. Since H4 was confirmed and Instagram does how the highest eWOM scepticism, I referred back to H1 which found that Instagram also has significantly low source credibility. The low score does have its evidence in the literature and research. Since it is the only platform not specifically related to travel, it is evident that people would trust it less. Moreover, covert advertising and promotion of destinations have been greatly present on Instagram, giving its users a rationale to doubt people's motivation for posting. Furthermore though not significantly, TripAdvisor holds middle level for both variables and Google Maps appears as the most trustworthy platform with the highest source credibility and lowest eWOM scepticism based on means. eWOM scepticism, therefore, does have a mediation effect since a correlation to source credibility exists. Referring back to the results of the multiple regression, we can assume that though eWOM scepticism does not affect travel intention directly, it may do so indirectly by reducing source credibility. Since there is an inversely proportional correlation between the two variables and source credibility does have a significant effect on travel intention, the mediation effect of eWOM scepticism is present.
           As has been determined by now, source credibility does undoubtedly predict travel intention. To understand the factors contributing to higher source credibility and travel intention, I also included travel involvement in the experiment as a moderator. This factor could be considered as the attitude towards target behaviour, additional to attitude towards following the advice on platforms measured by Casalo et al.'s (2011) scale. To test whether enduring travel involvement influences travel intention and whether credible platforms as perceived by high involved travellers are more convincing, I tested H5, which was rejected. Neither travel involvement nor the interaction effect significantly affected travel intention. The only significant effect was again detected by source credibility. My sample on average included highly involved travellers, which though they perceived source credibility of each platform differently, also lacked significant eWOM scepticism towards them. The lack of moderation effect can thus have several explanations. One the one hand, the small number of low involved travellers in my sample was not strong enough to detect the credibility of the platforms differently from high involved travellers. The lack of difference in travel involvement levels is also shown in the absence of a significant effect on travel intention. On the other hand, since all three chosen platforms did appear as trustworthy, all travellers, regardless of their level of involvement, might put the same emphasis on source credibility. Source credibility consequently does not depend on travel involvement. 
           There are also other factors contributing to higher travel intention. Already in 2008, Cheung et al. assumed that not only the destination and review but also the platform's design and reputation can affect people's behaviour. Though determining the connection between both has been touched on in many different pieces of research, no one has directly determined the correlation. Due to this, I posed the last hypothesis H6, which was confirmed. The better user experience of an online travel platform the higher source credibility. And since it has been previously shown that higher source credibility leads to higher travel intention, it can also explain why user experience influences travel intention. This premise is also supported by comparing the levels of user experience with levels of source credibility. Though not significantly, Google Maps does have the best user experience and the highest source credibility among the platforms. User experience, therefore, is a contributing factor of source credibility and greatly influences people's perception about travel communities. Based on the previous research that argues that the platform's attractiveness and likeability pursue travellers (Cheung et al., 2008), this finding only confirms it. Since every aspect of the review was the same across all platforms except the interface, it can be assumed that these findings hold even when excluding the influence of the confounding variables. 
           In conclusion, the experiment showed to be greatly contributing to not only the tourism industry and online platforms but also for marketing specialists and everyday travellers.       
           Firstly, for improving the quality of the online travel platforms, this research again determined that source credibility is an important predictor of travel intention. It can be achieved by regulating three factors; (1) creating the best user experience of a website, (2) lowering eWOM scepticism as much as possible, (3) targeting everyone. By achieving the first, making a review easy to find is important. Since Google Maps held insignificant first place in user experience, professionals can refer to its website for recommendations. Amongst all three platforms, it also offered the most information about the user. Second, to avoid eWOM scepticism, avert covert and fake promotions, as people can recognize and become even more sceptical towards the platform as a whole. Google Maps had the highest mean of source credibility, which could be connected to inability for anyone to pay for a review. Next, as mentioned in user experience recommendations, including as much information about users as possible also lowers scepticism towards the reviews and the platform. Lastly, since travel involvement confirmedly does not influence perceived source credibility, it is important to make the website comprehensive for everyone, no matter how much they travel. Since all (non)-travellers perceive credibility as important, assuring to offer content and understanding for all travellers is necessary. In general, the research establishes that platforms need to test and monitor their user experience to keep it at the highest level, be transparent and open about paid promotions and advertising, disclose as much information about the users as possible and provide clear content for all levels of travellers. 
           Next, the most important recommendation for anyone working in tourism and marketing is to include the most credible platforms in their campaigns and adapt the reviews based on target group's characteristics. Firstly, choosing the right platform that the audience perceives as the most credible one is crucial as seen in the research. Since Instagram showed the lowest source credibility, it would be beneficial to reconsider the investments made on that platform. Travel influencers and covert promotions so prominently present may have a negative outcome due to low credibility of Instagram. Preferably, professionals should invest that money in promotions on TripAdvisor and an increase in the number of reviews on Google Maps, since both platforms were considered more credible by respondents. Furthermore, it is important to create content for all levels of travellers, since all of them value credibility equally. This finding can help professionals understand that the content should be adapted to both experienced travellers as well as beginners. Different jargon, pertinent destinations and helpful information on these platforms can attract more people. In sum, marketers and tourism professionals should adopt the use of platforms and reviews to the target audience based on the results.
           Ultimately, travellers can benefit from the study to learn about the most credible platforms and characteristics that make a review authentic. Based on the results, Google Maps and TripAdvisor are the most credible platforms to receive recommendations from of the three tested. Moreover, for young travellers, Instagram has determined to be a trustworthy source as well, though it should be assessed with caution. Despite not having a direct effect on travel intention, eWOM scepticism was nevertheless proven the highest on Instagram and influential for source credibility. None of the platforms showed great distrust or scepticism towards them, confirming to be valuable and credible sources of travel information.   
87.1 
87.2 5.1 Limitations and further research
	Though the results of the study are persuasive and interesting to implement, they must be assessed with caution. During my experiment, several issues arose and had to be dealt with. Firstly, the time of dissemination of the survey coincided with the COVID-19 pandemic, when travel became impossible. Due to closed borders and travel limitations, a lot of people's perceptions about travel could have changed and influenced the answers of respondents unconsciously. Moreover, more than a quarter of respondents did recognize the effect of the pandemic on their decisions. Though these were distributed equally among platforms, the influence might have been more influential than just lower travel intention.
           In conjunction with the previous limitation, the sample size reflected these conditions. Though my sample size was adequate for the power of each group, it was the minimum number of respondents required. This could be a consequence of travel-ban, and people were not eager to respond to the topic since it was taken away from them. The only people on social media sites were younger generations with a lot of time, which is also reflected in my young sample. In the sample, sample bias was also present, since the survey was disseminated in mostly travel groups. Consequently, people's high travel involvement was to some extent a predisposition. 
           Another limitation that should be taken into account is the lack of literature on online travel platforms and therefore a low number of scales researching them. In the literature review previous to conducting the experiment, only one scale by Casalo et al. (2011) was identified. The rest of the scales had to be adapted to platforms, which could have influenced the results, despite showing high alpha values. 
           Based on these limitations and results of the analysis, I propose several recommendations for further research. Firstly, similar research should be conducted with a more generalizable sample that could confirm or reject the findings from this study. Though this research is valid and can be used as an example of perceptions of younger generations, it is necessary to replicate it to completely assure the validity of the findings. The reliability and newness of these findings could also be further assured by incorporating a control group in the experiment design. Its inclusion would determine that the results would measure the difference between platforms. 
           Moreover, a similar study could be replicated on a different population of a different continent or worldwide population. It would allow for a deeper understanding of each population travel behaviour and comparison of those characteristics around the world. Not only would that have practical implications in tourism and marketing, but also allowed tourist to choose the most credible online travel platforms based on the destination of their travel. Additionally, the research could also be replicated with other online platforms, such as Booking, Airbnb etc. to gain additional insights into their characteristics and credibility differences. 
           Lastly, to further extend on the findings, a study investigating the significance of reputation of the platforms could be beneficial. It would give insight into the importance of recognition and publicity the platforms receive and help additionally explain the results. Such a study could also focus on other factors that were not considered yet, such as level of involvement on online travel platforms i.e. travellers who write reviews vs. those who only read them, the number of reviews considered before having an effect on travel intention and focus on particular parts of user experience that were not specifically assessed in this study.

88 References
Ajzen I. (1985). From intentions to actions: a theory of planned behaviour. In Kuhl J. & 	Beckmann J. (Eds.) Action Control. Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg.
Aliaga, M. & Gunderson, B. (2002). Interactive statistics. New Jersey: Prentice Hall. 
Allen, M., Titsoworth, S., & Hunt, S.K. (2009). Quantitative research in communication. 	Thousand Oaks: SAGE Publications. 
Aslam, S. (2020, February 10). Stats, demographics & fun facts. Omnicoreagency. Retrieved 	from https://www.omnicoreagency.com/instagram-statistics/ 
Blackall, M. (2019, July 1). How many people travel abroad for holiday? The Guardian. 
Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/news/2019/jul/01/global-tourism-hits-record-highs-but-who-goes-where-on-holiday
Casalo, L.V., Flavian, C., & Guinaliu, M. (2011). Understanding the intention to follow the 
advice obtained in an online travel community. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(2), 622-633. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.04.013
Chambliss, D.F. & Schutt, R.K. (2006). Making sense of the social world: methods of 	investigation. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.
Cheung, C.M.K., Lee, M.K.O., & Rabjohn, N. (2008). The impact of electronic word-of-
mouth. The adoption of online opinions in online customer communities. Internet Research, 18(3), 229-247. doi:10.1016/j.dss.2012.06.008
Degruttola, M. (2019). How traveller-created images influence every part of the booking 	cycle. Simpleviewinc.com. Retrieved from 	https://www.simpleviewinc.com/blog/stories/post/guest-post-how-traveler-created-	images-influence-every-part-of-the-booking-cycle/
Dou, X., Walden, J.A., Lee, S., & Lee, J.Y. (2012). Does source matter? Examining source 
effects in online product reviews. Computers in Human Behavior, 28(5), 1555-1563. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2012.03.015
Ferns, B., & Walls, A. (2012). Enduring travel involvement, destination brand equity, and 	travelers' visit intentions: A structural model analysis. Journal of Destination 	Marketing & Management, 1(1-2), 27-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jdmm.2012.07.002
Geuens, M., & Pelsmacker, D. P. (2017). Planning and conducting experimental advertising 
research and questionnaire design. Journal of Advertising, 46(1), 83-100.
Hsu, C.H.C., & Huang, S. (2012). An extension of the theory of planned behaviour model for 
tourists. Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Research, 36(3), 390-417. doi: 10.1177/1096348010390817
Hu, Y., & Sundar, S.S. (2010). Effects of online health sources on credibility and behavioral 
intentions. Communication Research, 37(1), 105-132. doi: 10.1177/00936502093551512
Hussain, S., Ahmed, W., Jafar, R.M.S., Rabnawaz, A., & Jianzhou, Y. (2017). Ewom 	source credibility, perceived risk and food product customer's information adoption. 	Computers in Human Behavior, 66(1), 96-102. 	http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.09.034
Key figures on Europe. (2020). Ec.europa.eu. Retrieved from 	https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/3217494/10164469/KS-EI-19-001-EN-	N.pdf/33ab6c0c-a0c6-5294-3948-b1fb9973d096
Kishore, A. (2019, June 16). What is Local guides for Google Maps? Online tech tips. 	Retrieved from https://www.online-tech-tips.com/google-softwaretips/what-is-local-	guides-for-google-maps/
Lam, T., & Hsu, C.H.C. (2006). Predicting behavioural intention of choosing a travel 
      destination. Tourism Management, 27(4), 589-599. 	doi:10.1016/j.tourman.2005.02.003
Laugwitz B., Held T., Schrepp M. (2008). Construction and evaluation of a user experience 	questionnaire. In Holzinger A. (Ed.), HCI and Usability for Education and Work. 	USAB 2008. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 5298. Springer, Berlin, 	Heidelberg.
Lee, H., Law, R., & Murphy, J. (2011). Helpful reviewers in TripAdvisor, an online travel 
Community. Journal of Travel and Tourism Marketing, 28(7), 675-688. doi: 10.1080/10548408.2011.611739
Lian, T. & Yu, C. (2019). Impacts of online images of a tourist destination on tourist travel 	decision. An International Journal of Tourism Space, Place and Environment, 21(4), 	635-664. https://doi-org.eur.idm.oclc.org/10.1080/14616688.2019.1571094
March, R. & Woodside, A.G. (2005). Tourism behavior. Travelers' decisions and actions. 	CABI Publishing: Oxon, UK.
Matthews, B. & Ross, L. (2010). Research methods. London: Pearson Longman. 
Miller, C. (2017, January 26). How Instagram is changing travel. National Geographic. 	Retrieved from https://www.nationalgeographic.com/travel/travel-interests/arts-and-	culture/how-instagram-is-changing-travel/
Moran, G., & Muzellec, L. (2017). eWOM credibility on social networking sites: A 
framework. Journal of Marketing Communications, 23(2), 149-161. doi: 10.1080/13527266.2014.969756
Muijs, D. (2004). Doing quantitative research in education with SPSS. London: SAGE 	Publications.   
Neuman, W.L. (2014). Experimental Research. In Social Research Methods: Qualitative and
      Quantitative Approaches (7th Ed.), pp. 281-313. Essex: Pearson.
Ohanian, R. (1990). Construction and validation of a scale to measure celebrity endorsers' 
perceived expertise, trustworthiness, and attractiveness. Journal of Advertising, 19(3), 39-52. https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.1990.10673191 
O'Reilly, K., MacMillan, A., Mumuni, A.G., & Lancendorfer, K.M. (2016). Extending our 
understanding of eWOM impact: The role of source credibility and message relevance. Journal of Internet Commerce, 15(2), 77-96. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332861.2016.1143215
Pearce, P.L. (1982). The social psychology of tourist behavior. Pergamon press: Oxford. 
Romei, V. (2020). In charts: Europe's demographic time-bomb. Financial times. Retrieved 	from https://www.ft.com/content/49e1e106-0231-11ea-b7bc-f3fa4e77dd47 
Schrepp, M., Hinderks, A., & Thomaschewski, J. (2017). Design and evaluation of a short 	version of the user experience questionnaire (UEQ-S). International Journal of 	Interactive Multimedia and Artificial Intelligence, 4(6), 103-108. doi: 	10.9781/ijimai.2017.09.001
Shan, Y. (2016). How credible are online product reviews? The effects of self
generated and system-generated cues on source credibility evaluation. Computers in Human Behavior, 55(2), 633-641. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.10.013
Sigala, M. (2008). Web 2.0, social marketing strategies and distribution channels for city 
destinations: enhancing the participatory role of travelers and exploiting their collective intelligence. In M. Gasco-Hernandez, T. Torres-Coronas (Eds.), Information communication technologies and city marketing: digital opportunities for cities around the world (pp. 221-245). Hershey: IGI Global.
Soliman, M. (2019). Extending the theory of planned behaviour to predict tourism destination 	revisit intention. International Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Administration. 	https://doi.org/10.1080/15256480.2019.1692755
Sparks, B. & Pan, G. W. (2009). Chinese outbound tourists: understanding their attitudes, 	constraints and use of information sources. Tourism management, 30(2), 483-394. 	doi: 10.1016/j.tourman.2008.10.014
Sterling, G. (2019, November 18). Google Maps becomes more 'social' with Local Guides 	follow feature. Search Engine Land. Retrieved from 	https://searchengineland.com/google-maps-becomes-more-social-with-local-guides-	follow-feature-325322
Sweeney, M. (2018, February 16). 'Parents killed it': why Facebook is losing its teenage 	users. The Guardian. Retrieved from 	https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/feb/16/parents-killed-it-facebook-	losing-teenage-users
Tourism statistics - top destinations - Statistics Explained. (2020). Ec.europa.eu. 	
	Retrieved from https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-	explained/index.php/Tourism_statistics_-top_destinations#Spain_-_	top_foreign_destination_for_EU_residents_in_2017
TripAdvisor. (2013). 24 insights to shape your TripAdvisor strategy. TripAdvisor.com. 	Retrieved from https://www.tripadvisor.com/TripAdvisorInsights/w710 
Walker, P. (2019, September 6). Between 'fake' reviews and tourist traps, why does anyone 	still use TripAdvisor? Telegraph. Retrieved from 	https://www.telegraph.co.uk/travel/comment/is-tripadvisors-influence-waning/ 
Wang, P. (2014). Understanding the influence of electronic word-of-mouth on outbound
tourists' visit intention. Digital Services and Information Intelligence, 445(3), 33-45.
Weitzl, W. (2014). Measuring electronic word-of-mouth effectiveness. Developing and 
      applying the eWOM trust scale. Springer Gabler: Vienna.
Weitzl, W., Wolfsteiner, E., Einwiller, S., & Wagner, U. (2016). When credibility truly 
matters online: Investigating the role of source credibility for the impact of customer reviews. Advances in Consumer Research, 44(6), 353-358. 
Ye, Q., Law, R., Gu, B., & Chen, W. (2011). The influence of user-generated content on 
travel behavior: An empirical investigation on the effects of e-word-of-mouth to hotel online bookings. Computers in Human Behavior, 27(2), 634-639. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2010.04.014
Yuzhanin, S. & Fisher, D. (2016). The efficacy of the theory of planned behavior for 	predicting intentions to choose a travel destination: a review. Tourism review, 71(2), 	135 - 147. doi: 10.1108/TR-11-2015-0055
Zhang, X.J., Ko, M., Carpenter, D. (2016). Development of a scale to measure skepticism 	toward electronic word-of-mouth. Computer in Human Behaviour, 56(3), 198-208. 	https://doi.org/10.1080/15256480.2019.1692755



89 APPENDICES
89.1 Appendix A: Pre-test

Dear Madame, Dear Sir,              
Thank you for agreeing to participate in this survey. It is a part of my Master thesis research, conducted as a part of Master in Media and creative industries at the Erasmus University of Rotterdam. In my thesis, I investigate travellers' behaviour in relation to online travel platforms. In specific, I am interested whether online reviews on travel platforms TripAdvisor, Instagram and Google Maps influence travellers' travel intention differently due to their perceived characteristics. That is why I am curious in your evaluation of 8 chosen online travel reviews from different platforms and 8 different pictures from the same destination. This will help me define the optimal and most convincing review. The survey takes around 10 to complete.              
To participate in this survey, you must be at least 18 years old. Your participation is completely voluntary and anonymous.               
If you have any questions, concerns, or complaints, please contact me, Pia Erman (pia.erman95@gmail.com).               
I ensure you to protect the privacy to the maximum extent allowable by law. Your answers are recorded and processed anonymously and will only be accessed by me and my mentor, and will only be used for the purposes of the thesis.               
Once again, I greatly appreciate your time and participation in this survey. It will be of great help to my research.
With best regards, Pia Erman

About the study
What is the study about and why am I doing it?The purpose of my Master thesis is to determine whether different perceptions of online travel platforms influence travellers' travel intention after reading the travel reviews posted on them. I want to learn whether travel platforms TripAdvisor, Instagram and Google Maps are perceived differently by travellers and if these perceptions influence people susceptibility to follow the reviews on them.
What will happen if you take part in this survey?	 If you agree to take part in this study, you will be asked a to read a series of online travel reviews such as those that appear on online travel platforms and them on the direction of the message they convey (completely positive - completely negative). You will also be asked to select a favourite photo from a selection and demographic questions (age, sex, education). How long will this study take and how many people will be in the study? Participation in this study will tale about 10 minutes and include about 30 participants. What data will I collect from you? As part of this study, I will collect data about how you perceive online travel reviews, resembling the ones posted on online travel platforms. I will also collect the data of your preference of the photos showed. Some demographic information (age, sex, education) will also be collected. What will happened to the information I collect about you after the study? I and the University will keep the research data for future research. You name and other information that can directly identify you will not be collected. All data will be secured in a password protected file. How will I compensate you for participating in the survey? For participating in this study, you will not be compensated in any way, except for the notion of helping me get my master's degree. Your participation in this study is voluntary. It is totally up to you to decide to be in this research study. Even if you decide to be a part of it now, you may change your mind and stop at any time. You do not have to answer any questions you do not want to answer. If you decide to withdraw before this study is completed, only the data you have already entered will be used.  Contact information for me and questions about the research. If you have any questions about this research or your involvement in it, you may contact: Pia Erman, Student at Erasmus University Rotterdam Erasmus University Rotterdam Email: pia.erman95@gmail.com



Q3 By clicking the button bellow, you are agreeing to be in this study. If at any time you wish to stop participating, simply close your browser window.
o I consent  (1) 



Q4 Please read the following review carefully
  "Tenerife must be one of the most underrated and overlooked destinations in Europe. It has sea, sun, scenic grandeur and it has excellent and affordable cuisine and raunchy nightlife. The downside is that it is four and a half hours flying time away from the UK and Western European cities. Which is fine by me because I like it nice and quiet, in the day time at least."



Q5 From negative to positive, how would you describe this review?    
o 0  (0) 
o 1  (1) 
o 2  (2) 
o 3  (3) 
o 4  (4) 
o 5  (5) 
o 6  (6) 
o 7  (7) 
o 8  (8) 
o 9  (9) 
o 10  (10) 



Q6 To what extent would you say that the review is...
Not at all (1)Very little (2)A bit (3)Moderately (4)A great deal (5)Ambiguous (1) o o o o o Understandable (2) o o o o o Clear (3) o o o o o 


Q7 How would you describe the length of this review?
Too shortJust rightToo long
012345678910
Length ()


Page BreakQ12 Please read the following review carefully
  "Tenerife's got something for everyone, young and old. Great beaches, good restaurants, friendly people, plenty of things to do for kids, plenty of places to explore around the island, great weather but can be poor January till March but can still wear shorts on a colder night."


Q13 From negative to positive, how would you describe this review?
o 0  (0) 
o 1  (1) 
o 2  (2) 
o 3  (3) 
o 4  (4) 
o 5  (5) 
o 6  (6) 
o 7  (7) 
o 8  (8) 
o 9  (9) 
o 10  (10) 


Q14 To what extent would you say that the review is...
Not at all (1)Very little (2)A bit (3)Moderately (4)A great deal (5)Ambiguous (1) o o o o o Understandable (2) o o o o o Clear (3) o o o o o 


Q15 How would you describe the length of this review?
Too shortJust rightToo long
012345678910
Length ()


Page BreakQ16 Please read the following review carefully
  "Really great place for a great vacation. There is everything, from A to Z, many hotels, many shops and restaurants, even many Russian restaurants. The beach is also nice, unfortunately, it was in the summer when it was very cold in the water. However, this place can only be recommended. You can take the bus to other places. Sometimes there is not just a street parade but a boat parade. If you have no flip-flops for the beach, you can buy them, there is a very large selection from cheap to expensive, from brandless to Nike and Adidas. If you like adventure there are also many beaches with big waves."



Q17 From negative to positive, how would you describe this review?      
o 0  (0) 
o 1  (1) 
o 2  (2) 
o 3  (3) 
o 4  (4) 
o 5  (5) 
o 6  (6) 
o 7  (7) 
o 8  (8) 
o 9  (9) 
o 10  (10) 



Q18 To what extent would you say that the review is...
Not at all (1)Very little (2)A bit (3)Moderately (4)A great deal (5)Ambiguous (1) o o o o o Understandable (2) o o o o o Clear (3) o o o o o 



Q19 How would you describe the length of this review?
Too shortJust rightToo long
012345678910
Length ()


Page BreakQ20 Please read the following review carefully
  "Really diverse landscapes, very nice people and a lot of variety. If you read this: take your music with you, the radio stations are terrible! Otherwise perfect for a diverse hiking holiday. By the way, the volcano is breathtaking! :)"



Q21 From negative to positive, how would you describe this review?
o 0  (0) 
o 1  (1) 
o 2  (2) 
o 3  (3) 
o 4  (4) 
o 5  (5) 
o 6  (6) 
o 7  (7) 
o 8  (8) 
o 9  (9) 
o 10  (10) 



Q22 To what extent would you say that the review is...
Not at all (1)Very little (2)A bit (3)Moderately (4)A great deal (5)Ambiguous (1) o o o o o Understandable (2) o o o o o Clear (3) o o o o o 


Q23 How would you describe the length of this review?
Too shortJust rightToo long
012345678910
Length ()


Page BreakQ24 Please read the following review carefully
  "The view of a snow-capped Tiede from a black lava sun-soaked beach. A stunning opera house that seems to be held up by skyhooks. Wonderful old beautiful kept Spanish houses, villas and squares and tropical gardens. Thriving university culture and vibrant young community. An island that is more about beauty and history than getting rat arsed and sleeping the day away..."



Q25 From negative to positive, how would you describe this review?
o 0  (0) 
o 1  (1) 
o 2  (2) 
o 3  (3) 
o 4  (4) 
o 5  (5) 
o 6  (6) 
o 7  (7) 
o 8  (8) 
o 9  (9) 
o 10  (10) 



Q26 To what extent would you say that the review is...
Not at all (1)Very little (2)A bit (3)Moderately (4)A great deal (5)Ambiguous (1) o o o o o Understandable (2) o o o o o Clear (3) o o o o o 



Q27 How would you describe the length of this review?
Too shortJust rightToo long
012345678910
Length ()


Page BreakQ28 Please read the following review carefully
  "Tenerife has got so much going for it. 365 days warm weather, things to do for the young and the mature people, good beaches, great nightlife, coastal walkways great for walking and ideal for wheelchairs. If you don't want the high nightlife there are quieter areas you can go to. It has one of the best Water Parks in the world, shows you can go and watch, and public transport is one of the best to get around on. Mount Teide is a great trip to go on. The Island is a Tax-Free Island so it's cheaper than mainland Spain."



Q29 From negative to positive, how would you describe this review?
o 0  (0) 
o 1  (1) 
o 2  (2) 
o 3  (3) 
o 4  (4) 
o 5  (5) 
o 6  (6) 
o 7  (7) 
o 8  (8) 
o 9  (9) 
o 10  (10) 



Q30 To what extent would you say that the review is...
Not at all (1)Very little (2)A bit (3)Moderately (4)A great deal (5)Ambiguous (1) o o o o o Understandable (2) o o o o o Clear (3) o o o o o 



Q31 How would you describe the length of this review?
Too shortJust rightToo long
012345678910
Length ()


Page BreakQ32 Please read the following review carefully
  "I must say that both my wife and I love it... We are on vacation right now and it is a beautiful island with very good beaches, some less than others of course, but all very beautiful... I will definitely return."



Q33 From negative to positive, how would you describe this review?
o 0  (0) 
o 1  (1) 
o 2  (2) 
o 3  (3) 
o 4  (4) 
o 5  (5) 
o 6  (6) 
o 7  (7) 
o 8  (8) 
o 9  (9) 
o 10  (10) 



Q34 To what extent would you say that the review is...
Not at all (1)Very little (2)A bit (3)Moderately (4)A great deal (5)Ambiguous (1) o o o o o Understandable (2) o o o o o Clear (3) o o o o o 



Q35 How would you describe the length of this review?
Too shortJust rightToo long
012345678910
Length ()


Page BreakQ39 Please look at the following review carefully




Q40 To what extent would you say this post is...
Not at all (1)Very little (2)A bit (3)Moderately (4)A great deal (5)Believable (1) o o o o o Authentic (2) o o o o o 



Q41 Please look at the following review carefully




Q42 To what extent would you say this post is...
Not at all (1)Very little (2)A bit (3)Moderately (4)A great deal (5)Believable (1) o o o o o Authentic (2) o o o o o 



Q43 Please look at the following review carefully




Q44 To what extent would you say this post is...
Not at all (1)Very little (2)A bit (3)Moderately (4)A great deal (5)Believable (1) o o o o o Authentic (2) o o o o o 


Page BreakQ45 Please observe the following photos carefully and choose ONE that is the most appealing to you     1



Q49 2



Q50 3



Q51 4



Q52 5



Q53 6



Q54 7




Q55 8



Q56 Which picture is the most appealing to you?
o 1  (1) 
o 2  (2) 
o 3  (3) 
o 4  (4) 
o 5  (5) 
o 6  (6) 
o 7  (7) 
o 8  (8) 


Page BreakEnd of Block: Introduction

Start of Block: Block 1

Q61 What is your year of birth?
   ________________________________________________________________



Q65 With which gender do you identify most?
o Male  (1) 
o Female  (2) 
o Other  (3) 
o Rather not say  (4) 



Q63 What is the highest level of school you have completed or the highest degree you have received? 
o Less than high school degree  (1) 
o High school graduate  (2) 
o Bachelor's degree  (3) 
o Master's degree  (4) 
o Doctoral degree  (5) 
o Other  (6) 



Q51 Do you live/study/work in Tenerife?
o Yes  (1) 
o No  (2) 



Q50 Is there anything you would like to let me know? Is there anything weird or unusual in the survey?
   ________________________________________________________________

End of Block: Block 1



89.2 Appendix B: Experiment survey 

Dear Madam, Dear Sir,            
Thank you for agreeing to participate in this survey. It is a part of my Master thesis research, conducted as a part of Master in Media and Creative Industries at the Erasmus University of Rotterdam. In my thesis, I investigate travellers' behaviour in relation to online travel platforms. In specific, I am interested whether online reviews on travel platforms TripAdvisor, Instagram and Google Maps influence travellers' travel intention differently due to their perceived characteristics.             
To participate in this survey, you must be at least 18 years old and currently living in Europe. Your participation is completely voluntary and anonymous. There are no risks associated with participating in this survey.             
If you have any questions, concerns, or complaints, please contact me, Pia Erman (pia.erman95@gmail.com).            
I ensure you to protect the privacy to the maximum extent allowable by law. Your answers are recorded and processed anonymously and will only be accessed by me and my mentor, and will only be used for the purposes of the thesis.            
Once again, I greatly appreciate your time and participation in this survey. It will be of great help to my research.
With best regards, Pia Erman



Q49 By clicking the button bellow, you are agreeing to be in this study. If at any time you wish to stop participating, simply close your browser window.
o I consent  (1) 

End of Block: Block 3

Start of Block: Tripadvisor

1 Please look and read the following review on TripAdvisor carefully. Based on this review you will later be asked a series of questions.




2 Based on the review, please express your agreement with the following statements
Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)I would feel comfortable behaving according to this advice from TripAdvisor (1) o o o o o I would not hesitate to take into account the comments and suggestions made by other community members (2) o o o o o I would feel secure in following the suggestions made by other community members (3) o o o o o I would rely on the recommendations made by other community members (4) o o o o o 



3 Based on the review, please express how strongly you agree with the following statements
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)I would likely visit Tenerife in the next 12 months (1) o o o o o o o I intend to visit Tenerife in the next 12 months (2) o o o o o o o I want to visit Tenerife (3) o o o o o o o 



4 After reading the review, I want to travel to Tenerife to...
Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)experience warm weather (1) o o o o o visit water parks (2) o o o o o enjoy night life (3) o o o o o do shopping (4) o o o o o go sightseeing (5) o o o o o relax on beaches (6) o o o o o 



5 After reading the review, please express your agreement with the following statements
Strongly agree (1)Somewhat agree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat disagree (4)Strongly disagree (5)I think following the advice from TripAdvisor would be pleasant for me (1) o o o o o I think following the advice from TripAdvisor would be favorable for me (2) o o o o o I think following the advice from TripAdvisor would be fun for me (3) o o o o o I think following the advice from TripAdvisor would be enjoyable for me (4) o o o o o I have a positive opinion about the advice from TripAdvisor (5) o o o o o 


Page Break6 I consider TripAdvisor
1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Undependableo o o o o DependableDishonesto o o o o HonestUnreliableo o o o o ReliableInsincereo o o o o SincereUntrustworthyo o o o o Trustworthy

7 I believe that people reviewing on TripAdvisor are
1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Not experto o o o o ExpertInexperiencedo o o o o ExperiencedUnknowledgeableo o o o o KnowledgeableUnqualifiedo o o o o QualifiedUnskilledo o o o o Skilled


Page Break

8 Please indicate to what degree do you agree with the following statements.
Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)We can hardly depend on getting the truth from TripAdvisor (1) o o o o o Online reviews on TripAdvisor are not generally truthful (2) o o o o o In general, online reviews don't reflect the true picture of a subject (3) o o o o o TripAdvisor cares more about getting you to buy things (4) o o o o o TripAdvisor intends to mislead (5) o o o o o People writing online reviews on TripAdvisor are always up to something (6) o o o o o TripAdvisor includes online reviews from people who are not necessarily the real customers (7) o o o o o People writing online reviews on TripAdvisor are pretending they are someone else (8) o o o o o On TripAdvisor, different reviews are often posted by the same person under different names (9) o o o o o 


Page Break9 How you would describe TripAdvisor website?
1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Obstructiveo o o o o SupportiveComplicatedo o o o o EasyInefficiento o o o o EfficientConfusingo o o o o ClearBoringo o o o o ExcitingNot interestingo o o o o InterestingConventionalo o o o o InventiveUsualo o o o o Leading edge



10 For me, travel (is)
1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Unimportanto o o o o ImportantOf no concerno o o o o Of great concernInsignificanto o o o o SignificantMeans nothingo o o o o Means a lotDoes not mattero o o o o Matters a lot


Page Break11 With which gender do you identify most?
o Male  (1) 
o Female  (2) 
o Other  (3) 
o Rather not say  (4) 



12 What is your age?
▼ 18 (1) ... 102 (85)



13 Where do you currently live?
▼ Albania (1) ... Other (49)



14 What is the highest level of school you have completed or the highest degree you have received? 
o Less than high school degree  (1) 
o High school graduate  (2) 
o Bachelor's degree  (3) 
o Master's degree  (4) 
o Doctoral degree  (5) 
o Other  (6) 



15 Do you live/study/work in Tenerife?
o Yes  (1) 
o No  (2) 



Q51 On which online platform was the shown review written?
o TripAdvisor  (1) 
o Instagram  (2) 
o Google Maps  (3) 

End of Block: Tripadvisor

Start of Block: Instagram
Q61 Please look and read the following review on Instagram carefully. Based on this review you will later be asked a series of questions.




Q62 Based on the review, please express your agreement with the following statements
Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)I would feel comfortable behaving according to this advice from Instagram (1) o o o o o I would not hesitate to take into account the comments and suggestions made by other community members (2) o o o o o I would feel secure in following the suggestions made by other community members (3) o o o o o I would rely on the recommendations made by other community members (4) o o o o o 



Q63 Based on the review, please express how strongly you agree with the following statements
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)I would likely visit Tenerife in the next 12 months (1) o o o o o o o I intend to visit Tenerife in the next 12 months (2) o o o o o o o I want to visit Tenerife (3) o o o o o o o 



Q64 After reading the review, I want to travel to Tenerife to...
Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)experience warm weather (1) o o o o o visit water parks (2) o o o o o enjoy night life (3) o o o o o do shopping (4) o o o o o go sightseeing (5) o o o o o relax on beaches (6) o o o o o 



Q65 After reading the review, please express your agreement with the following statements
Strongly agree (1)Somewhat agree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat disagree (4)Strongly disagree (5)I think following the advice from Instagram would be pleasant for me (1) o o o o o I think following the advice from Instagram would be favourable for me (2) o o o o o I think following the advice from Instagram would be fun for me (3) o o o o o I think following the advice from Instagram would be enjoyable for me (4) o o o o o I have a positive opinion about the advice from Instagram  (5) o o o o o 


Page Break

Q66 I consider Instagram 
1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Undependableo o o o o DependableDishonesto o o o o HonestUnreliableo o o o o ReliableInsincereo o o o o SincereUntrustworthyo o o o o Trustworthy


Q67 I believe that people reviewing on Instagram are
1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Not experto o o o o ExpertInexperiencedo o o o o ExperiencedUnknowledgeableo o o o o KnowledgeableUnqualifiedo o o o o QualifiedUnskilledo o o o o Skilled


Page Break

Q68 Please indicate to what degree do you agree with the following statements
Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)We can hardly depend on getting the truth from Instagram (1) o o o o o Online reviews on Instagram are not generally truthful (2) o o o o o In general, online reviews don't reflect the true picture of a subject (3) o o o o o Instagram cares more about getting you to buy things (4) o o o o o Instagram intends to mislead (5) o o o o o People writing online reviews on Instagram are always up to something (6) o o o o o Instagram includes online reviews from people who are not necessarily the real customers (7) o o o o o People writing online reviews on Instagram are pretending they are someone else (8) o o o o o On Instagram, different reviews are often posted by the same person under different names (9) o o o o o 
Page BreakQ69 How you would describe Instagram website?
1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Obstructiveo o o o o SupportiveComplicatedo o o o o EasyInefficiento o o o o EfficientConfusingo o o o o ClearBoringo o o o o ExcitingNot interestingo o o o o InterestingConventionalo o o o o InventiveUsualo o o o o Leading edge



Q70 For me, travel (is)
1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Unimportanto o o o o ImportantOf no concerno o o o o Of great concernInsignificanto o o o o SignificantMeans nothingo o o o o Means a lotDoes not mattero o o o o Matters a lot


Page BreakQ71 With which gender do you identify most?
o Male  (1) 
o Female  (2) 
o Other  (3) 
o Rather not say  (4) 



Q72 What is your age?
▼ 18 (1) ... 102 (85)


Q73 Where do you currently live?
▼ Albania (1) ... Other (49)


Q74 What is the highest level of school you have completed or the highest degree you have received? 
o Less than high school degree  (1) 
o High school graduate  (2) 
o Bachelor's degree  (3) 
o Master's degree  (4) 
o Doctoral degree  (5) 
o Other  (6) 



Q75 Do you live/study/work in Tenerife?
o Yes  (1) 
o No  (2) 



Q53 On which online platform was the shown review written?
o TripAdvisor  (1) 
o Instagram  (2) 
o Google Maps  (3) 

End of Block: Instagram

Start of Block: Google maps
Q46 Please look and read the following review on Google Maps carefully. Based on this review you will later be asked a series of questions.




Q47 Based on the review, please express your agreement with the following statements
Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)I would feel comfortable behaving according to this advice from Google Maps (1) o o o o o I would not hesitate to take into account the comments and suggestions made by other community members (2) o o o o o I would feel secure in following the suggestions made by other community members (3) o o o o o I would rely on the recommendations made by other community members (4) o o o o o 



Q48 Based on the review, please express how strongly you agree with the following statements
Strongly disagree (1)Disagree (2)Somewhat disagree (3)Neither agree nor disagree (4)Somewhat agree (5)Agree (6)Strongly agree (7)I would likely visit Tenerife in the next 12 months (1) o o o o o o o I intend to visit Tenerife in the next 12 months (2) o o o o o o o I want to visit Tenerife (3) o o o o o o o 



Q49 After reading the review, I want to travel to Tenerife to...
Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)experience warm weather (1) o o o o o visit water parks (2) o o o o o enjoy night life (3) o o o o o do shopping (4) o o o o o go sightseeing (5) o o o o o relax on beaches (6) o o o o o 



Q50 After reading the review, please express your agreement with the following statements
Strongly agree (1)Somewhat agree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat disagree (4)Strongly disagree (5)I think following the advice from Google Maps would be pleasant for me (1) o o o o o I think following the advice from Google Maps would be favourable for me (2) o o o o o I think following the advice from Google Maps would be fun for me (3) o o o o o I think following the advice from Google Maps would be enjoyable for me (4) o o o o o I have a positive opinion about the advice from Google Maps (5) o o o o o 


Page Break

Q51 I consider Google maps 
1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Undependableo o o o o DependableDishonesto o o o o HonestUnreliableo o o o o ReliableInsincereo o o o o SincereUntrustworthyo o o o o Trustworthy



Q52 I believe that people reviewing on Google maps are
1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Not experto o o o o ExpertInexperiencedo o o o o ExperiencedUnknowledgeableo o o o o KnowledgeableUnqualifiedo o o o o QualifiedUnskilledo o o o o Skilled


Page BreakQ53 Please indicate to what degree do you agree with the following statements
Strongly disagree (1)Somewhat disagree (2)Neither agree nor disagree (3)Somewhat agree (4)Strongly agree (5)We can hardly depend on getting the truth from Google maps (1) o o o o o Online reviews on Google maps are not generally truthful (2) o o o o o In general, online reviews don't reflect the true picture of a subject (3) o o o o o Google maps cares more about getting you to buy things (4) o o o o o Google maps intends to mislead (5) o o o o o People writing online reviews on Google maps are always up to something (6) o o o o o Google maps includes online reviews from people who are not necessarily the real customers (7) o o o o o People writing online reviews on Google maps are pretending they are someone else (8) o o o o o On Google maps, different reviews are often posted by the same person under different names (9) o o o o o 


Page BreakQ54 How you would describe Google maps website?
1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Obstructiveo o o o o SupportiveComplicatedo o o o o EasyInefficiento o o o o EfficientConfusingo o o o o ClearBoringo o o o o ExcitingNot interestingo o o o o InterestingConventionalo o o o o InventiveUsualo o o o o Leading edge



Q55 For me, travel (is)
1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)4 (4)5 (5)Unimportanto o o o o ImportantOf no concerno o o o o Of great concernInsignificanto o o o o SignificantMeans nothingo o o o o Means a lotDoes not mattero o o o o Matters a lot


Page BreakQ56 With which gender do you identify most?
o Male  (1) 
o Female  (2) 
o Other  (3) 
o Rather not say  (4) 



Q57 What is your age?
▼ 18 (1) ... 102 (85)



Q58 Where do you currently live?
▼ Albania (1) ... Other (49)



Q59 What is the highest level of school you have completed or the highest degree you have received? 
o Less than high school degree  (1) 
o High school graduate  (2) 
o Bachelor's degree  (3) 
o Master's degree  (4) 
o Doctoral degree  (5) 
o Other  (6) 



Q60 Do you live/study/work in Tenerife?
o Yes  (1) 
o No  (2) 



Q54 On which online platform was the shown review written?
o TripAdvisor  (1) 
o Instagram  (2) 
o Google Maps  (3) 

End of Block: Google maps

Start of Block: Block 4

Q48 Do you believe that circumstances surrounding the COVID-19 affected your answers in this survey?
o Yes  (1) 
o No  (2) 



Q50 Do you have any comments regarding the survey?
   ________________________________________________________________

End of Block: Block 4








Audio-visual podcasts as the future of news reporting 

An experiment in audience engagement across different podcast formats



	


Student Name:	Jeroen de Waal
Student Number:	540159

Supervisor: 		Dr. Joao Ferreira Goncalves


Master Media Studies - Media, Culture & Society
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication
Erasmus University Rotterdam


Master's Thesis 
June 24







Audio-visual podcasts as the future of in-depth news reporting 




90 ABSTRACT

Podcasts are a growing phenomenon in digital media for their ability to supply audiences with extremely varied content across a wide variety of interests. Yet, video streaming platform YouTube is the most widespread used platform to listen to these podcasts, hinting at a wish from the audiences to have visual stimuli included in the stories, as they may add a new dimension to the stories. As podcasts are concerned with immersing their audience into a world to fulfill their needs, these stimuli might have a positive effect on the engagement of the audience. The study was concerned with how these visual elements as well as the length of the stories people are subjected to impacts the way in which they engage accordingly. By creating an online survey experiment in which participants were subjected to either a short or a long podcast that included visual elements or did not, the importance of stated variables was uncovered. This was executed in order to not only find out which of these conditions would generate the best response from audiences in terms of engagement, it will also provide publishers with greater insights into what motivations drive audiences to consume podcasts. It was found that length did not impact the engagement with the news to a strong degree. A connection between length and visual stimuli was found in the resulting engagement being strongest in the long video podcast. However, the inclusion of visual stimuli made the experience more enjoyable for audiences and led to higher engagement. Even though the podcasts are concerned with the news, entertainment and social values can be seen as drivers to engagement with podcasts. The inclusion of visual elements was able to bring this out more, opposed to a level of intimacy usually felt from audio-only podcasts and therefore puts into perspective the plethora of ways in which podcasts could and should be utilized. Video podcasts show the potential to aid the citizenry by clarifying news stories more in-depth and provide information in a way that simultaneously fulfills other gratifications podcast listeners seek out and should therefore be reconsidered as a main way of disseminating news online by producers and publishers of the medium.   

KEYWORDS: Podcast, Audience Engagement, Online News, Visual Stimuli, Story length


91 Table of Contents
ABSTRACT	2
1.	Introduction	4
1.1 Social relevance	4
1.2 Scientific relevance and research question	5
2.	Literature review	7
2.1 Audience engagement	7
2.2 Visual Stimuli	8
2.3 Intimacy	11
2.4 Podcast length	12
2.5 Age	13
2.6 User motivations	14
2.7 Interaction between length and video	16
3. Method	17
3.1 Choice of method	17
3.2 Sampling	20
3.3 Operationalization	23
3.4 Pre-test	28
3.5 Research design	30
3.6 Validity and reliability	31
4.	Results	36
5. Conclusion	41
5.1 Discussion	41
5.2 Conclusions and implications	45
5.3 Limitations	47
5.4 Future research	48
References	49
Appendix A: Questionnaire	55
Appendix B: Transcripts	71
Appendix C: Visual elements of the podcast	74

1. Introduction
	In recent years, the media environment has expanded massively. Due to a growing plethora of social media platforms, constantly mounting possibilities due to technological advancements and economic possibilities, traditional forms of media have also been reinvented for modern times. One of these being the podcast, which has been coined as the revival of traditional radio (Markman, 2015). Just like the media environment itself, the variety of podcast genres and topics is endless. With over 2 million shows to choose from (Futuri Media, 2019), the podcast has positioned itself as a provider of content for comedy, politics and news as well as more niche interests such as review shows of particular series or Greek mythology. The abundance of options available combined with the accessibility and linearity of audio content has contributed to its growth in popularity over the last decade (Wrather, 2016). For example, if you had asked any U.S. citizen 10 years ago whether they ever listened to a podcast, only 23% would have responded positively. Currently, that figure sits at 55% and illustrates an immense increase in podcast popularity in this era (Edison Research & Triton Digital, 2020).		Podcasts have increasingly been used in other aspects of life as well, most notably in education (Hew, 2009; Shahid & Zuraina, 2017) as well as language training (Şendağ, Gedik, & Toker, 2018). However, discussions about the ideal podcast length have been raised when debating the effectiveness on information retention and knowledge transmission in these podcasts. With programming across all forms of media being directed towards shorter stories in order to retain audience's attention, news has increasingly become limited to ''being a powerful headline service'' (Wormald, 2012), and thus prevents deeper-dives into particular stories that could serve the public good. In TV news, the median length of stories sits at 2 minutes and 23 seconds while on YouTube this is only 2 minutes and 1 second. Additionally, over 50% of the most popular stories on this platform run under 2 minutes (Wormald, 2012) and thus fail to adhere to societies' wants for greater explanation of important items. 
   91.1.1 1.1 Social relevance
       News podcasts have gained attention because of their ability to disseminate the news through storytelling narratives and by adhering to audiences' wishes for digging deeper into stories, explaining terminology and clarifying why certain sources were used (Wilner, Montiel Valle & Masullo, 2019). Podcasts permit this level of depth, as the increased length of stories complements the mediums' strength of analysis and explanation. Its' popularity is reflected in the numbers, as the news genre only makes up 6% of the podcast ecosystem yet 21% of the most popular podcasts rated by listenership are classified under news (Newman & Gallo, 2019). Although podcasts are an aural-based medium, video streaming platform YouTube is the most sought out platform for podcast consumption (70.2%), reaching more than double the audience of any music streaming platform like Spotify (33.9%) or iTunes (32.6%) (Futuri Media, 2019). This can be partly attributed to the widespread reach of YouTube as one of the most recognizable websites globally. Yet more importantly, it includes a feature which cannot be found on other platforms, video. This allows creators who use YouTube as their distribution channel to add features that are not realizable through aural-based platforms.						Since the discrepancy between listenership on audio-only versus audiovisual platforms is significant, the success of YouTube as a podcast platform through the addition of visual stimulation cannot be overlooked. In fact, age groups ranging from 18 to 54 who listen to podcasts also chose YouTube as their favorite social media platform. The only age group for which it was the 2nd preferred platform, after Facebook, is the age group of 55 and over (Futuri Media, 2019). The inclusion of visual elements in news stories is considered to have societal implications due to its' power to influence public opinion of certain phenomena or social issues, therefore encouraging engagement with online news (Koivunen-Niemi & Masoodian, 2019). Therefore, a greater level of engagement through adding visual elements to these news stories presented on podcasts is expected. In the past few years, the news' ability to exercise influence on the public has received major attention which mostly impacted the publics' perception negatively. Podcasts have the potential to help counter this distrust in the news by explaining stories more in-depth as would be possible in a segment of a TV show or an article in a newspaper. It can include explanations as to why certain stories that are being produced are important and clarify why people should care. According to Masullo, Curry and Whipple (2020), encouraging audience engagement and nurturing personal connections with the audience are drivers of this trust, giving the podcast an opportunity to contribute to the cause on both a macro and personal level. To conclude, there is a gap between news production and consumption patterns which has not been investigated into yet. By diving into the effect of the podcast features of length and visual elements in podcasting on audiences, societies' requests for in-depth information could be served more effectively, while also providing opportunities for newsrooms create a better relationship with its' viewers and listeners.
   91.1.2 1.2 Scientific relevance and research question
       Audience engagement studies on podcasts have been undertaken, mostly focused on the motivations and preferences of users' afforded by this platform, emphasizing the audio features of podcasts (Perks, Turner & Tollison, 2019), such as the way in which a deeper relationship between audiences and hosts is established through aural immersion (Swiatek, 2018). However, with the recent developments in how audiences evaluate news (Wilner et al., 2019) and the proven added value of visual elements in reporting (Koivunen-Niemi & Masoodian, 2019), investigating its' effects on podcast listeners' interaction with news fills a gap in the current literature on this medium. Furthermore, the role of visual elements (Djerf-Pierre, Lindgren & Budinski, 2019) and story length (Lang, Shin, Bradley, Wang, Lee & Potter, 2005) in journalism and in-depth reporting has been scrutinized by various studies, yet their role in podcasts specifically has not been delved into. The study will take a quantitative approach whereas nearly all studies on podcast audiences are conducted from a qualitative point of view. This contributes to enriching research on audience engagement by presenting findings which are more generalizable and can thus help better inform podcast producers' on how to reach their audiences and bridge the gap between consumer needs and creators' offerings. In order to investigate further into this phenomenon, the research question this study will answer is: To what extent do podcast length and visual stimuli affect audience engagement in news podcasts?  
       This thesis is structured so that it will go through the process of answering the research question by first presenting the theoretical background consulted in chapter 2. Chapter 3 will include an explanation and justification for the research, will look into the methods used to carry out this project, discuss the research design and explain the measuring instrument and its validity and reliability in depth. Chapter 4 will focus on the results gathered from the online experiment and will interpret them in relation to the hypotheses and research question. Finally, chapter 5 will answer the research question, discuss implications and limitations and provide relevant recommendations for future research. 
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       


2. Literature review
       In this chapter, the existing body of literature on podcasts will be scrutinized and analyzed in-depth. A podcast can be outlined as an audio or video file which can be downloaded through media technology for playback at any later moment (McClung & Johnson, 2010). It is characterized by a plethora of listening genres that are not restricted to live listening and provide an alternative platform for journalism through storytelling, a distinctive feature in the current media landscape (Perks et al., 2019). Therefore, podcasts can secure a relationship with audiences and drive engagement by fulfilling motivational needs of consumers that lead to the consumption of entertainment products. Audience engagement needs to be defined and understood in the context of digital news from multiple perspectives. By looking into inclusion of visual stimuli, length of the podcast, podcast intimacy, user motivations and the impact on age the argument for the study is built.  
91.1.3 2.1 Audience engagement
       Trends like growing mobile functionality, interactivity, and multi-platform consumption have dominated the development of how audiences consume news, leading prominent news media to adjust their offerings to better match audience needs (Gutsche, 2019). The podcast plays into these needs effectively, because of the ability to easily incorporate them into our already media-rich lives resulting from its' technical affordances (Perks et al., 2019). Contrastingly, traditional news media like television opt fast and short stories to retain audiences' interests (Lang et al., 2005). Podcasts offer a different perspective by turning away from brief news items, and continue to grow as a medium which people utilize to stay up to date with current affairs (Newman & Gallo, 2019). As audience engagement knows multiple dimensions and explanations, measuring it in podcasts needs to be further understood in the context of this study. 											Meier, Kraus & Michaeler (2018) define audience engagement in digital news in terms of 5 dimensions; communications, storytelling, editorial analytics, personalized news and membership. For podcasts, engagement through communications can be established by allowing the audience to start discussion with others and comment, or engage through contribution of their own information, knowledge and opinions. Storytelling may be the most relevant dimension of engagement for this medium as a vehicle for intensive immersion in a story. This allows audiences to be more intensively involved in the topic of discussion and can be informative in terms of active participation with optical elements supplemented (Meier et al., 2018), and interlinks with the main gratifications podcast audiences seek out, transportation and immersion. (Perks et al., 2019). Editorial analytics can strengthen engagement by supporting the targets and strategies of the producer to warrant high quality content being more visible and having greater reach. The personalization of news can facilitate these gratifications as users partake in the process of selecting news of interest to them, which increases loyalty. Finally, participation can be fostered through membership, which goes beyond subscriptions and allows users to participate in fact-checking or accountability activities (Meier et al, 2018). Accordingly, audience engagement can be understood as ''a paradigm changes away from a lecturing towards a dialogue approach to journalism'' (Meier et al, 2018, p. 1060).						Nelson (2019) outlines audience engagement as a combination of the marketing practices of news producers and the media consumption patterns of audiences. Every action from audience attentiveness through page views or shares, online discussion through comments or user-generated content can be described as tangible and measurable actions carried out by audiences (Nelson, 2019; Krebs & Lischka, 2017). Additionally, there are two types of engagement distinguished. Reception-oriented engagement focuses on audiences, for example by looking at amount of comments or time spent with a story. Production-oriented engagement represents how audiences are involved in the production of stories and the amount of citizens involved in creating a story. (Nelson, 2019). 
2.2 Visual Stimuli											The first element to investigate is the visual element of the video-podcasts. Audiovisual media have significant benefits which cannot be obtained from aural media, and complement certain audience gratifications when it comes to news consumption. In this section, these benefits will be explored further in the context of podcasts. The concept of visual stimuli needs to be examined, as the notion can bring up a plethora of ideas, some of which may not be associated with podcasts naturally. In terms of podcast art and logo, setting the tone is done visually by attaching a specific aesthetic and adding an expectation for what the audio space provides, illustrating that visual elements are important for audio-only podcasts too. (Hancock & McMurthy, 2018). While audio-only podcasts leave the visual element free to be explored by users individually and allow audiences freedom for exploration (Perks et al., 2019), incorporating visual elements increases the realism of news stories. The use of visual elements can have different meanings across subgenres. For talk shows, it is often relevant to show the host as it aids in establishing a personal connection while for investigative journalism, graphs and statistical evidence bear more relevance. All in all, visual stimuli in this study will be defined as any image, graph or visual representation which is used to clarify an element of the story or provide background context. 
91.1.3.1 2.2.1 Learning from the news
       The cognitive theory of multimedia (Mayer, 2014) provides insight into the potential advantages audiovisual podcasts provide. This theory is based on three main principles of learning, in which auditory- and visual processing of information are separated through different learning channels each with its' limited capacity for handling information. This manifests itself in 5 distinct ways in the context of processing multi-media information, illustrating that individuals learn better and retain more information that is provided in an audiovisual manner, as opposed to strictly auditory, referred to as the multimedia principle (Mayer, 2014). This explains the significant expansion of video news on platforms such as YouTube, coincidentally the most used platform for podcast consumption (Gutsche, 2019; Futuri Media, 2019). Nonetheless, on YouTube the majority of journalistic material comes from traditional television and current affairs shows which are repurposed online, yet adhere to the standards and practices set for traditional news platforms. Content wise, these news items were not acclimatized to the online environment as they mostly comprised of recycled clips for television (Djerf-Pierre et al., 2019). In terms of audience engagement, this provides opportunities for podcasts by providing greater transparency through in-depth storytelling combined with visual evidence of those events which in turn increases trust in the news. When visual and verbal cues reinforce each other, the positive effect of multimedia information processing is strongest because visuals cues can serve as an additional mode for audiences to store information and recall news items (Opgenhaffen & D'Haenens, 2011).			The motivations for audiences on this platform contribute to the greater retention of information as well. As a medium through which audiences have full control over the content they listen to at any given time (Perks et al., 2019), the potential for efficient processing of news is amplified due to the increased level of motivation and concentration displayed by audiences. They actively seek out specific stories, so greater attention is paid to the news and associations between new and existing knowledge is made more often (Opgenhaffen & D'Haenens, 2011). Nonetheless, this does not imply that inclusion of visual cues always has a desirable effect, as there is a limited amount of information which can be processed at a certain time. If too much information is presented at once, the brain is forced into making decisions on which pieces of information to pay attention to, how connections between different pieces of information are made and how these connect with existing knowledge (Mayer, 2014). 
91.1.3.2 2.1.2 Impact on audiences
       The non-linearity of online news and level of control users have could also lead to higher knowledge levels. Through being able to control news consumption, people can individualize their learning process, increase autonomy over content which causes a higher motivation to learn. Contrasting arguments can be made regarding the overall knowledge people are exposed to online, as news is more selectively scanned and therefore news that is not deemed interesting gets passed over. Since the flow of news can be controlled, this can lead to less exposure to diverse stories and leads citizens to be less informed. The absence of linearity also has a positive effect on learning. Non-linearity is often associated with increased interactivity, which can aid absorption of information as it has beneficial effects on the cognitive processes and leads to better recall of content. Prerequisite to this is the assumption that individuals are familiar with the online platform these podcasts are accessed through, as lack of technological knowledge can lead people to be unable to correctly process information (Kruikemeier, Lecheler & Boyer, 2018). As the level of news in the form of data is increasingly ample, it may be hard for readers to fully understand its' meaning without visual aid. By including it, the data would become more accessible and comprehensible (Koivunen-Niemi & Masoodian, 2019). For audiences including these elements works well as they perceive presented news as more realistic, which simultaneously has a positive impact on their impression of the medium itself (Opgenhaffen & D'Haenens, 2011). 									In the technological expansion of news, the differences between various media are decreasing as online and offline news become more similar in terms of relying on visual cues as a driver of attention. Optimization of these visual processes leads the news to be easier to follow as journalists' steer how the audience should read. Therefore, visual attention is an antecedent of learning from news (Kruikemeier et al., 2018). On top of that, when multiple levels of cognitive engagement are stimulated, more active engagement with news can be achieved (Djerf-Pierre et al., 2019). Beyond engagement, transparency within news can be enhanced this way as audiences have insight into how news is produced, making news producers more accountable to their audiences. Especially visualizations of data, characteristically included in online news, can help realize this (Kennedy, Weber & Engebretsen, 2020). On a societal level, it helps to increase media literacy and the ability to distinguish real and fake news, which can re-establish trust in the news. These opportunities ultimately present chances for news media to fortify journalistic credibility (Meier et al., 2018). Not only would this contribute to the greater good of better informed citizens, it also provides opportunities for media research itself when used as a tool for recognizing shifts of public opinion or narratives in the dominant discourse (Koivunen-Niemi & Masoodian, 2019).
H1: Audience engagement with news is higher when visual stimuli are included
91.1.4 2.3 Intimacy
       The lack of visual stimuli in podcasts can be explained by the aural nature of the medium, providing various benefits such as the level of intimacy that can be established between producer and consumer by allowing individuals to connect with others in distant places, being able to hear personal stories at self-determined times which are delivered in an intimate manner (Swiatek, 2018). As a more informal way of communicating through an audio narrative, content is considered to be more conversational and less crafted (Llinares, Fox & Berry, 2018). The sonic-only medium is able to establish this through the uniqueness of the medium as 'the sonically generated relationally of podcasting, gives listeners the impression of directness and closeness, making it a compelling way to bridge spatial and temporal divides.' (Swiatek, 2018, p. 176). Listeners take a part in someone else's personal journey, and monetary motivations, social wishes and industrial structures have moved into the direction of supporting this format of podcast. 									With news podcasts enjoying high popularity, they have taken on a role of public service media in a highly competitive environment which places premium value on getting attention from individual listeners by presenting an intimate version of the host within a topic of public interest. To some extent this dynamic exists in other media forms, but in podcasts its' eminence is amplified (Sienkiewicz & Jaramillo, 2019), showing establishing a relationship with audiences is largely influential in a show's success.  In the case of niche subjects, the notion of intimacy can be especially helpful in the context of bridging the gap between viewing the producer-audience relationship as one described as a friendship rather than seeing the producer as a detached expert (Favaro, 2017). This helps build a level of identification and creates a sense of belonging to an online community (Favaro, 2017; Sienkiewicz & Jaramillo, 2019), as being a private, silent participant in other people's conversations concerning a subject you are passionate about, generates a deep sense of connection (Llinares et al., 2018). For marginalized and hidden communities this also has beneficial effects on the space they can claim in public opinion through the perceived privacy and safety the podcast brings (Sienkiewicz & Jaramillo, 2019) and imbues a sense of inclusivity for producers and listeners alike (Llinares et al., 2018). These notions have shown that intimacy, which is mainly achieved through listening and relying on sounds only, additionally makes podcasts an effective format for knowledge transmission. The listening process in audio-only podcasts therefore leads to active, intentional and conscious listening, in contrast to hearing information whilst focusing on visual cues (Swiatek, 2018). 					The power of the audio podcast in creating an intimate setting for its listeners is very strong. Intimacy is highly applicable in niche markets and for those looking to immerse their audiences into a fantasy world. Yet, for news podcasts it may be less important, as they do not have a similar aim. Intimacy is not a necessity for success with news podcasts as the added personal touch can obscure the political or socio-cultural elements of the story since the common good and objectivity may be in contrast with individual experiences (Sienkiewicz & Jaramillo, 2019).						Generational equivalence between producer and audience is an important factor in the relationship, as it strengthens the perceived shared identity between these groups (Favaro, 2017). New ways of establishing this level of intimacy, and further monetize the podcast, led a number of producers to increase the sonic interactivity the medium affords by creating apps in which audiences have even more freedom and control over how they listen to their podcast. For example, through allowing customization of various aural competencies such as adapting play speed and introducing playback options such as a silence remover. This helps enhance the ubiquitous listening experience by alleviating the process of integrating the medium into audiences' everyday lives and capturing audience attention through a continuous stream of additional content (Morris & Patterson, 2015). This practice does not remain limited to audio podcasts, as this extra channel can also be applied to video-podcasts. Considering the importance of audio formats for intimacy, we expect that:
H2: Audio-only podcasts achieve a greater level of intimacy
91.1.5 2.4 Podcast length
       The numbers suggest a surge in podcasts' position in the media landscape, yet they are often utilized as a secondary channel through which existing news streams can be distributed as additional content from established institutions (Llinares et al., 2018). This impacts the length of the items produced in podcasts from traditional media companies who have made the switch to digital. They are focused on producing news-bulletins or news roundups in which the most important news of the day is swiftly discussed and last up to 10 minutes. Contrastingly, digital or native podcasts generally opt for deep-dives into specific subjects who are not as easily reached through traditional media channels and are therefore able to reach more niche audiences (Newman & Gallo, 2019). The importance of the length of podcasts has been scrutinized within the context of effect on learning and retaining information. In this context, a podcast length of 12 minutes proved optimal for acquiring knowledge (Shahid & Ali, 2017), while Sendağ, Gedik & Toker (2018) argue a podcast used for this purpose should not be longer than 10 minutes. However, opposing findings were also shared, as shorter podcasts of 3 to 5 minutes contribute to increased learning as well, particularly in the context of video podcasts. More information can be processed at once which requires audiences' focus for a shorter period of time. Other factors come into play in scrutinizing the ideal podcast length, as too lengthy podcasts may tire or bore people and a too short podcast would not provide a sufficient amount of information to capitalize on the podcasts' strength (Shahid & Ali, 2017). 								The structural inclusion of features to help the audience manage and process information and increase what they take away from news also increase cognitive processes of information retention (Lang et al., 2005; Mayer, 2014) However, commercial podcasts setting out to adhere to providing in depth-information generally run for 25 minutes and have enjoyed the largest successes with audiences. This length has therefore been adopted as the industry standard (Newman & Gallo, 2019). The preferred direction towards a shorter podcast also depends on the arguments that quality of audience attention is likely to decrease over time and results to less engagement and interest in the stories whereas a shorter engagement time is linked to experienced digital news users who are efficiently able to navigate and scan online news environments for relevant content so they can engage with it more intensely. As speed and efficiency are valued within digital media, a lack thereof is widely disliked as it intensifies the experience of time, whereas television and newspapers are often used in moments of relaxation and seen as a calming ritual (Groot Kormelink & Costera Meijer, 2019).						Between the time allocated for the average news podcast (Newman & Gallo, 2019) and the time academics support (Shahid & Ali, 2017; Sendağ, Gedik & Toker 2018), there is a large discrepancy concerning the length of a podcast. Therefore, strategies producers use to keep audiences engaged with their content as long as possible and the actual experiences of digital news users do not align and lead to lower levels of engagement as a result. For news productions, it is a problem to make audiences commit to a story online as the amount of consumable content is vast. In general, digital media users are only willing to exceed this time spent when it concerns news which generates new understandings and is constructive of nature, such as insights into complex political matters. (Groot Kormelink & Costera Meijer, 2019).
H3: Increased podcast length has a negative effect on audience engagement 
91.1.6 2.5 Age
       The length of news stories furthermore has a greater effect on younger audiences as they are associated with seeking out shorter news stories and prefer fast-paced programming, whereas this has a negative effect on older audiences. Especially mature adults, age 55 and over, remain loyal to television networks for news consumption and a large proportion of this audience segment relies on TV news only or uses it as the primary means for news consumption, while other traditional media and the Internet are used significantly less (Lang et al., 2005). This can be linked to the motivations for news consumption of this demographic, who mostly tune into content for opinion-forming and information seeking purposes which traditionally are achieved through watching network television or talk shows (Lee, 2013). However, for younger age cohorts the Internet is the main means of news consumption and frequent changes between news sources is common (Lang et al., 2005). Younger audiences tend to follow a different set of motivations as older counterparts, as social and entertainment motives prove strongest (Lee, 2013). Through digital media these segments make use of the portability and convergence to bypass traditional channels for their news consumption. Even though this means that this generation of users is more fragmented, it also allows people with heightened interests in the news constant exposure. Therefore, this age group can be referred to as born digitals, who almost exclusively use the internet for staying up to date on current affairs. Their media use can also be classified as digital press, who rely on both internet and newspapers, but are not interested in TV news (Papathanassopoulos et al., 2013). 									This is reflected in the statistics of podcast consumers, with 12-34 year olds (48%) being overrepresented and 55 or over (20%) underrepresented (Edison Research & Triton Digital, 2020) There is no evidence supporting the impact of gender with regards to the stimuli to be tested. Other socio-economic factors tend to play a role in the type of information media accessed, such as level of income and education as podcast listeners tend to skew towards adults up to 34 with a high level of education and advanced digital prowess (Perks et al., 2019) yet this does not influence the chosen variables either.
H4: Audience engagement among younger audiences is higher in shorter podcast formats

91.1.7 2.6 User motivations
       Engagement from audiences can only be achieved if their entertainment needs are met, which means the motivations of podcast audiences need to be taken into account in this process. User motivations for consuming news can fall under one or more of the following categories: seeking information, entertainment, opinion validation and formation and social motivations (Lee, 2013; Krebs & Lischka, 2017). These motivations drive audiences to different types of content, yet the podcast provides an opportunity to capitalize on these different consumption incentives as they are not mutually exclusive and can all attribute to leading to podcast consumption (Lee, 2013). Yet, social and entertainment motivations are most strongly linked to podcasts (Perks et al., 2019). The nature of the podcast functioning as a dialogue-based narrative can mimic the traditional newscasts or televised talk shows and current affairs program that fulfill the information seeking and opinion validation motivations. Ultimately, the information seeking aspect plays a role in any type of news program and is therefore still the fundamental motivation (Lee, 2013) that needs to be understood further, especially in the context of video-podcasts. A major component of news are visual stimuli, in which the audio-driven medium is naturally lagging behind, yet the inclusion of these elements can provide great benefits for audiences as described in this chapter. 										Motivation towards news consumption furthermore follows different patterns in the context of online news due to greater control over consumption and higher variations of linearity in news, meaning that audiences can personalize and individualize their consumption process more flexibly. As people can manage which news they are exposed to and are empowered to select content of interest to them, the motivation to learn from news is fueled. Contrastingly, the selectivity audiences display in their choices of news content can have a negative impact as individuals are exposed to a less diverse range of news stories and become less informed as a result (Kruikemeier et al., 2018). Incentives for people for accessing podcasts may be stronger as they more often fill a niche market as traditional media channels (Newman & Gallo, 2019), and are thus more likely to complement their knowledge as different news media provide different types of news, as opposed to using different news media for accessing news that overlaps with other channels (Papathanassopoulos et al., 2013). 				Motivation to learn from news can be seen as a 'learner's internal state that initiates and maintains goal-directed behavior. It is reflected in the learners' willingness to exert effort to engage in appropriate cognitive processing during learning'' (Mayer, 2014, p. 65) and can be viewed as an internal and personal process (Mayer, 2014). The Internet is considered to be a goal-oriented medium in comparison to traditional media since audiences are actively searching and aware of the motives they want to gratify during their online activity. Yet, the gratifications audiences seek out from online activity do not always line up with those obtained. 								The relationship between motivation and engagement can be linked to the interactivity presented, and can be differentiated between medium and human interactivity. Medium interactivity refers to interactive communication through the medium itself and focuses on users' ability to control the communication and how the medium is utilized, covering factors related to the specific format that is chosen. Comparatively, human interactivity consists of the interpersonal interaction and communication which happens between people, occuring through a medium and refer to the hosts and each individual listener reached (Yoo, 2011). Therefore, the study expects the impact of certain gratifications sought out by audiences to lead to higher levels of engagement as others. 
       H5: Low levels of motivation have a negative effect on audience engagement.	
91.1.8 2.7 Interaction between length and video 
       Building on the literature on inclusion of visual elements and time spent on the podcast, a negative relationship between length and video is expected. Building on the theory of multimedia learning, a short video podcast would work better as a lengthy video podcast, since the audiences' are stimulated both aurally and visually which makes them able to retain more information in a shorter period of time, but also leads them to reach their information limit sooner since multiple streams of cognitive abilities are at work simultaneously. The longer video podcast may still be able to immerse the audience into the story, yet can more easily create a cognitive overload of information and lead to negative associations (Mayer, 2014) as soon as this level is met. On the other hand, a podcast with visual elements included has several benefits in terms of engagement in terms of volume and in number of options through its' technical affordances and increased coverage of the media environment. Antithetically, the lack of including visual elements is expected to have the opposite effect. Podcasts excluding video are expected to lead to better results in terms of engagement if they are lengthier, as audiences do not need to focus on multiple streams of information and can immerse themselves through aural stimulation only which allows them to concentrate for longer. On top of that, it allows for a more intimate listening experience which boosts engagement as well.					The literature on podcasts provided in-depth information on how to elicit audience engagement through focusing on important elements of this media product in different formats. This format can be understood in terms of two important changing elements, visuals and podcast length. On the one hand, audio-only podcasts are expected to create a stronger bond between consumer and producer through the intimate nature of the podcast, yet learning from the news may be strained more due to a lack of senses being stimulated. The video-podcast contrastingly will allow learning from the news to be done more efficiently, yet one of the major strength of the podcast, intimacy, may strain audience engagement. In table 2.1 below, the research design is provided visually as well.
       
       
       
       
       
       





	

Figure 2.1: Research model and overview of hypotheses













91.2 3. Method
91.2.1 3.1 Choice of method
   Overall, the aim of the research was testing the effect of manipulating podcast length and the inclusion or exclusion of visual stimuli on audience engagement with news podcasts. The research followed a deductive approach, which is commonly used in quantitative research to formulate hypotheses and test them by using standardized measures to gather numerical data for statistical analysis, as the main assumption regarding the relationships between the variables is derived from the theory presented. Moreover, the study is grounded in a positivist approach to the social sciences (Neuman, 2014).											A quantitative research method was chosen as it helps give broader explanations for how and why certain podcasts lead to higher engagement as others. It is not focused on gaining in-depth information on a limited number of cases but aims at uncovering the effect of manipulating podcast content on a wider spectrum with the goal of inferring findings to the whole population (Neuman, 2014; Babbie, 2016). The research takes on an explanatory approach as the purpose of the study is to test a theories' prediction while simultaneously enriching its' explanation through further inquiry. It extends the theory of multimedia learning to a new topic in the media landscape to identify the source of specific social behaviors in the context of media usage (Neuman, 2014) by identifying a few factors which can explain variations in engagement (Babbie, 2016).							Experimental research specifically was employed as this is the most applicable quantitative method for its' ability to focus on cause and effect relationships, which is not achievable through other quantitative methods and is done in three consecutive steps (Geuens & de Pelsmacker, 2017). First, the experiment was manipulated by methodically adapting the independent variables visual stimuli and podcast length on the dependent variable, audience engagement. This was achieved by assigning participants to one of four conditions, all of equal sample size. Second, random assignment of the participants contributed to decreasing research bias as demographic and other relevant characteristic are distributed equally (Neuman, 2014). Third, the research needed to exercise a level of control over the experiment so external variables not part of the experiment did not interfere with the validity of results (Wharrad & Silcocks, 2009). The experiment was conducted as an in between groups experiment and was able to test the statistical differences between the four groups as it evidenced how modification of the podcast based on different treatment lead to a change in audience engagement.		The ability to exercise these measurements of control is vital to the research as in everyday life there are many factors interfering with people's preferences for podcasts and their interaction with the content, so it would be impossible to distinguish whether the test variables length and visuals were drivers or if the effects were caused independent of this. Because of these measures, the level of internal validity is high in experimental research since the approach is more controlled as other research methods. On the other hand, external validity scores lower based on the argument that the strict control of conditions cannot be compared to a real life situation (Wharrad & Silcocks, 2009; Babbie, 2016). For example, a percentage of podcast listeners do this while performing other tasks such as cooking or driving (Newman & Gallo, 2019) which decrease concentration on the important factors. In this instance, manipulation of the scenarios was necessary to achieve the research goal. Depending on the experimental condition, participants were exposed to either a short podcast of 5.5 minutes with or without video, or alternatively to a podcast of 7.5 minutes with or without video. For the study no control group was used as the study is not concerned with finding differences in engagement based on the absence of a stimuli, but rather the differences between stimuli (Babbie, 2016). 
91.2.1.1 3.1.1 Online experiments
     Since the study measures engagement with digital media, the participants did not physically have to be present for the experiment. This enabled to use of online surveys as the instrument, allowing participants to remotely contribute. As participants can take part from home and use their own devices, the barrier to enter the experiment was lower as people could remain in a place of comfort. Additionally, the use of a web based survey experiment allowed a larger variety of nationalities to be included as place and time the research is conducted is less rigid and more flexible. It is additionally the cheapest and fastest way to conduct the study which alleviates administrative issues (Neuman, 2014; Hooley, Marriott & Wellens, 2012). The flexibility of this questionnaire type also facilitated the inclusion of visual elements in a straightforward manner. This made it easier for complex questions to be asked and diluted researcher bias due to a lack of direct communication or interference at play (Neuman, 2014). This method of data collection was utilized as it implements a number of crucial features of experiments into the research design, such as random assignment and the manipulation of the independent variable. The dependent variables were subsequently measured by using scales (Babbie, 2016). Online survey experiments additionally have the advantage that data is not collected in the artificial atmosphere of a laboratory, which makes it easier to create a realistic setting and combat low levels of external validity (Wharrad & Silcocks, 2009; Hooley et al., 2012). 		 		On the contrary, there are also issues arising from administering the experiment through online questionnaires such as protecting the respondents' privacy and confidentiality through using a secure website, encrypting data and eliminating non-vital identification information of respondents. On top of that, the design of the survey is more complex, so checking and verifying compatibility of software and hardware play a role as well as ensuring easy readability and consistency of the content to combat mistakes and miscomprehension. Minimizing these problems was countered during the pre-testing stage (Hooley et al., 2012; Neuman, 2014), and will be discussed later in this chapter. There are still potential issues which could not be minimized this way and fell outside of the grasp of the researcher, such as the way the participant engages with the study and whether they are simultaneously doing other tasks (Hooley et al., 2012). The online survey was distributed using the software tool Qualtrics and can be found in Appendix A.  
91.2.2 3.2 Sampling
       The units of analysis in the experiment were podcast listeners. They were located through using various channels on which fans of podcasts can be found. Primarily, the social media platform Reddit was used for this purpose as subscribers of large sub-reddit communities focusing on podcasts were approached. These include r/podcasts, r/podcasting and r/podcast and provided a total number of 2 million potential participants. Additionally, the Reddit sub community /samplesize, in general meant for finding survey respondents, was used as well (Reddit, 2021). Although smaller in size, various Facebook community pages have also been utilized for this purpose, for example Podcasters' Support Group, the Podcast Movement Community and Promote your Podcast (Facebook, 2021). 				The sample of this study was divided into 4 sub samples based on the conditions. Each of these subgroups needed to consist of a sample size of 30 participants which was achieved with a roughly 45 participants in each condition, totaling 176 valid responses. Thus, the targeted amount of 120 participants was reached. As a result, comparisons of attitudes and motivations are evocative among different conditions as these lead to higher statistical power. It can lead relatively small differences between subsamples to be statistically significant. A requirement to this remains that it is also substantial enough to draw conclusions about either accepting or rejecting a hypothesis. If the statistical power is too high, type 1 errors can egress leading non existing effects to be found of statistical significance. Type 2 errors can occur as well in the case statistical power is too weak and fosters results that lack meaningful scientific significance, which happens in the case an existing effect cannot be measured though an hypotheses. This marks the importance of finding a balance in the level of statistical power in order to avoid both types of experimental errors (Geuens & de Pelsmacker, 2017). It is therefore vital that the experiment was designed to be valid, so the differences between results represented the effect of the treatment which was being examined. This way, the differences between conditions can be interpreted and the effects can ascribe the variance in audience engagement (Lipsey, 1990). 
91.2.2.1 3.2.1. Sampling Method
       In quantitative research, probabilistic sampling methods are often utilized to sample participants as it provides a directive for making statistical inferences from findings in the sample to the population as a whole (Neuman, 2014). It offers benefits such as time and cost savings since a relatively small number of respondents can help generalize results for the entire population of podcast listeners. The U.S. alone already has around 155 million monthly podcast listeners, thus relying on a representative sample through probability sampling enforces the accuracy of this sampling method (Babbie, 2016). This type of sampling, however, relies on an existing sampling frame as it is a crucial element for creating a relevant sampling. Access to such a frame is not always attained which can make probability sampling hard to effectively use in many studies as is the case now (Babbie, 2016). Conversely, using non-probability sampling allowed the researcher to circumvent these issues. One of the non-probabilistic sampling strategies used was convenience sampling, which relies on the participants who are easy to reach and produce results swiftly and cheaply. It is also unreliable as it may not represent the population due to the haphazardly way of sampling, and may result in a loss of important elements of the research (Neuman, 2014). For example, age skewed towards a younger audience because of the media used to approach respondents. Therefore, the convenience sampling strategy was enriched by including purposive sampling. This method has similar drawbacks like uncertainty over accurate representation of the population. However, it is a viable strategy in this study because of the nature of the population. Even though the overall population is big and its' subsets can be easily identified, the group as a whole stay rather anonymized which makes inventorying all of them impossible. Another benefit of purposive sampling is that it allows the researcher to select the participants which can contribute to the study based on representativeness and usefulness (Babbie, 2016). Snowball sampling was not actively practiced, although may result naturally from participant contribution due to the spreadable nature of the media accessed to distribute the experiment.			The convenience or purposive sample relies on voluntary participation, and both fall within a sampling strategy known as self-selection sampling. This brings advantages such as reduced recruitment time and financial resources (Sterba & Foster, 2011). However, it also brings some pitfalls as the motivation for people to participate results from their already established interest in podcasts. This may lead the sample to not be representative to the entire population as it skews towards a subgroup of the population (Sterba & Foster, 2011). However, targeting audiences more familiar with podcasts were reached in this manner as well. Other personal characteristics such as education, gender, socio-economic status or nationality as well as characteristics of listenership were not included in the sampling criterion. 											 
91.2.2.2 3.2.2. Sample description
       This research divided its' participants into 4 groups that were exposed to different conditions based on random assignment. The participant distribution went as follows: N = 45 listened to the short version of the audio podcast, while N = 42 listened to the long audio podcast. N = 45 were submitted to the short video podcast, while N = 44 watched the long video podcast. The data gathered from the experiment was analyzed by using data analysis tool SPSS. Guaranteeing comparability between subgroups aids the validity of the experiment, particularly in the case of populations with heterogeneous relevant characteristics (Geuens & de Pelsmacker, 2017) which occurred due the way participants were approached. 										In total, a number of 181 responses were recorded. Out of these responses, 5 participants were excluded because of a missing birth year. None of the participants' responses had to be deleted due to straight lining, the almost identical answering of most questions in the dataset. Some participants failed to answer all questions, yet this issue was circumvented through pairwise exclusion. This finally leaves a sample of N = 176 valid responses for analysis, of which 80 males (45.5%) and 89 females (50.9 %). 3 participants (1.7%) stated their gender as non-binary and 3 participants preferred not to state their gender at all (1.7%). These numbers differ from existing reports, stating that 51% of podcast audiences are male and 49% are female (Edison & Triton, 2020). The disparity between the gender identities is even larger when comparing the study to the statistics for news podcasts, as 62% of audiences are male and only 38% are female (Nielsen, 2021). Although these numbers differed significantly, this did not impact the results of the study as gender was not a major variable used in this study. 				The average age of the sample is 30 years (M = 29.65, SD = 8.54), which is slightly above the average age of all podcast listeners. Looking at the distribution of the educational level of participants shows that 100 respondents have obtained a Bachelors' degree (56.8%) and only 3 participants have obtained less than a high school degree (1.7%). In total, 128 (72.7%) participants stated they have a bachelor's degree or more thus are highly educated individuals. which confirms the existing distribution of podcast listeners tend to be a younger and highly educated demographic (Perks et al., 2019).			The sample (N = 176) was varied in terms of nationalities, as responses were recorded from 22 different nationalities. However, the majority of responses were recorded from a few countries only, namely the USA (45.5%), the Netherlands (22.2%), Germany (6.8%) and the UK (5.7%). Although a large share of participants was from a small group of countries, the sample is still quite diverse with regards to nationality. This emphasizes how conducting the data collection online and distributing the survey experiment via international specific-interest groups on Reddit and Facebook offered the advantage of including participants from different countries in the sample. 						The most popular streaming platform for the podcast audiences is YouTube, with 88 participants (50.0%) stating they use this platform, closely followed by Spotify, used by 86 participants (48.9 %) and Apple Music, used by 58 participants (33.0%). The corresponding question in the survey experiment allowed the selection of multiple answers, accounting for the fact that participants might use more than one platform. These numbers reflect patterns which can be found when looking at how podcast listeners are distributed among different streaming services, with the 3 most popular platforms in the study reflecting those of the general population. However, +some discrepancies were present as well. According to industry reports, about 70% of listeners listen through YouTube, while only 34% is expected to listen through Spotify.  On average, participants spent 67 minutes per day listening to podcasts (M = 67.18, SD = 74.38). 
91.2.2.3  3.2.3 Random assignment
       Random assignment is an essential element to consider in experimental designs so sample characteristics can only differ by chance. This is necessary to ensure statistical inferences can be made (Geuens & de Pelsmacker, 2017). Random assignment means every participant has the equal chance to get assigned to a particular condition, which is important for two reasons. First, it makes sure that all the groups are comprised of participants with characteristics as similar as possible, which forms the basis of the comparison between these groups. Second, it aids in ruling out confounding factors. If one of the experimental groups would differ significantly from the others in terms of one specific characteristic, the changes in the measured outcome variable cannot be solely ascribed to the manipulation of the experiment, but could be caused by the differences between these groups. Therefore, random assignment of the groups is vital in ensuring the internal validity of the studies' chosen measurement (Neuman, 2014). In this research, Qualtrics was utilized to ensure randomization. By enlisting the randomization function in the software, the equal distribution among conditions was safeguarded. Apart from creating the conditions for which the process was necessary, the researcher was not involved in this randomization process.								
91.2.3 3.3 Operationalization
	The operationalization of the variables used in the research entails the establishment of a manner in which the concepts are made quantifiable. Thus, operationalization is a process of converting abstract concepts derived from theories in a measurable way. In this experiment, this was done through the online survey. This section delves into the operationalization of the theoretical concepts and how the main variables podcast length, visual stimuli, intimacy, age, and audience engagement were measured. It also comprises of an overview of additional variables measured. 
91.2.3.1 3.3.1 Independent variables: podcast length and visual stimuli
       Podcast length serves as one of the two independent variables in the research. Based on the literature reviewed on podcast length, it was determined to have a major role in the level of audience engagement of a show. It is therefore hypothesized that podcast length is able to predict engagement. Various reviewed studies have supported the assumption that the longer the podcast is, engagement with it is likely to decrease and information retention is lower (Shahid & Ali, 2017; Sendağ, Gedik & Toker 2018). It was operationalized as a categorical variable, with the 2 categories representing the different conditions which were compared. In the survey, the variable was not directly assessed as it represents one of the stimuli which was tested. The stimulus consisted of podcasts of 2 different lengths, representing the short and long form podcast. The shorter podcast of 5.5 minutes was a simplified version of the lengthy podcast of 7,5 minutes, and contained the same information in a condensed form to ensure cohesion in the experiment. In Appendix B, the transcript for the varying podcasts can be found. 										Extending the length of the podcast was not desirable in the experiment, due to the potential pitfall of mortality which could threaten the internal validity of the experiment (Neuman,2014). To establish the right length before the data collection process was carried out, the stimuli were examined with a pilot test. Since the research interfered with a natural occurring situation the respondents were aware of being studied. Therefore, deception was necessary to complete the research goal and a cover story was included (Neuman, 2014). The second independent variable which was used as a stimulus in the research is visual stimuli. According to the reviewed literature, it is assumed that the inclusion of visual elements in news stories leads to higher engagement (Opgenhaffen & D'Haegens, 2011) as well as cognitive benefits (Mayer, 2014). Similar to podcast length, visual stimuli were operationalized as an experimental condition rather than a variable measured through the survey experiment. It was operationalized as a categorical variable, with the 2 categories representing the different conditions which were compared. Naturally, the visual stimuli were adapted to reflect both scripts accurately. For the scope of the research and due to a lack of necessary resources, a video podcast with complete visual stimulation including visualization of the host could unfortunately not be recorded, the visual elements that were included in video form are provided in Appendix C. 						When recording, a few options for podcast topics were informed on, and were taken from some of the most interesting stories for the researcher in the past few months. Eventually, the topic of NFT's, Bitcoin and block chains was thought of.  In order to gain information on this topic, various online sources were consulted to create a story that was coherent and matched the content of an actual podcast. The necessary materials to create a professional video podcast, including a studio or audio resources were not able to be utilized.  Instead, a video podcast incorporating various graphs and images that contribute to the overall story were included. Although this may look less professional, it still provided extra content for the story. In the pre-test phase, professionalism will be reported on further due to minor issues that were found during this phase.  The podcast was recorded using podcast app Anchor.fm and were embedded in the survey itself. In order to ensure smoothness within this procedure, Soundcloud was used as a platform to distribute the audio podcasts, while YouTube was selected for the video podcasts respectively. On top of that, due to the widespread familiarity of both platforms, their technology was supported through Qualtrics, reducing technical problems. 
91.2.3.2 3.3.2 Variable: audience engagement
	The dependent variable which was measured in the study is audience engagement. As it is common in the social sciences to measure abstract concepts such as the attitudes and behaviors of individuals by using scales, audience engagement is measured as a continuous variable (Neuman, 2014). It favors using multiple-item scales, since they allow more detailed insights to be taken from the concept under study. Additionally, the use of scales previously used in studies is preferable. Since they were previously applied in other studies, they ensure the variable is correctly measured and help build reliability (Geuens & De Pelsmacker, 2017). The concept audience engagement was measured directly through H1 and H3.										Audience engagement as the dependent variable is hard to directly measure. To gain insights into participants' engagement with the different formats, the User Engagement Scale is an effective measuring tool. It uncovers how the variables interact with audience engagement and gained popularity in evaluating search, social networking and entertainment applications in user-centric research (O'Brien & Cairns, 2015). The original scale takes an attribute based approach to audience engagement and measures 6 factors; focused attention (Cronbach's α = .92), perceived usability (Cronbach's α = .91), aesthetics (Cronbach's α = .89), (Cronbach's α = .90), endurability (Cronbach's α = .86), novelty (Cronbach's α = .58) and involvement (Cronbach's α = .70) based on 26 items. The scale is measured based on a 5-point Likert scale. For this study, the scale is slightly adapted as it includes questions which are not relevant to the study such as 'I continued to listen to the podcast out of curiosity' as the experimental conditions made these items useless. 
91.2.3.3 3.3.3 Variable: intimacy
	Intimacy is another variable that was treated in the study, since the intimacy level was expected to differ based on the format of the podcast. Intimacy is a moderator variable that affects how positive or negative and how strong the effect between the independent variables and the dependent variable audience engagement is (Geuens & De Pelsmacker, 2017). Podcasts excluding visual stimuli were expected to contribute to eliciting intimacy, while this feature is expected to decrease when they are included. To measure the variable intimacy items from the Podcast Uses & Gratification scale (Perks et al., 2019) were adapted. From the literature reviewed, it is clarified the storytelling and immersive experience establishes intimacy and is one of the major motivations for users to engage with podcasts. The storytelling transportation factor taken includes 5 items which are measured on a 5-point Likert scale and asks participants to which extend they agree with statements indicating the perceived intimacy such as ''this podcast made the time go by quickly'' and ''I can picture the stories told through podcasts in my mind as I listen''. The variable is tested through H2.  
91.2.3.4 3.3.4 Variable: Motivation
	The last of the major variables to be tested in the study is the independent variable motivation. Derived from the studies on user motives and motivations for podcast consumption, different categories of motivation were found. These were found to be linked to both the age of the participants as well as the format and therefore possibly affects the direction and strength of the relationship between the predictor and criterion variable (Geuens & de Pelsmacker, 2017). The variable was tested through adapting the scale for motivation in news consumption by Lee (2013). The original scale tests 4 categories, entertainment-driven (Cronbach's α = .90), motivation-driven (Cronbach's α = .82), opinion-driven (Cronbach's α = .88) and social-driven (Cronbach's α = .92) based on 21 items (Lee, 2013). The items were tested in order to answer H5.
91.2.3.5 3.3.5 Additional variables
	Besides the main variables listed above, 7 additional variables were measured in the survey experiment. Although not the main focus of the research, they are able to provide necessary information as these variables can provide further insights into potential unexpected relationships. They also contribute to the understanding of the effects between independent variables and the dependent variable. At the start of the questionnaire, a number of introductory questions was asked. These questions were mainly used to distract from the actual purpose of the research. The questions asked were related to participants' usage and motivations for podcasts and platform use and help create a realistic context for the measurement. This provided more detailed information about the participants, which could also be used to enhance the analysis of their attitudes and intended behaviors. 			Audio platform is a categorical variable that measured which platforms participants use to listen to podcasts. It was measured by a multiple-choice question that allowed the selection of more than one answer, since participants might use multiple platforms. The eight answer categories consisted of some of the most popular and widely used audio platforms, including YouTube, Spotify and Apple Music. The open text field gives participants the option to state platforms they use which were not part of the list. The audio platforms included are based on usage reports by Edison Research & Triton Digital (2020) and Futuri Media (2019). Furthermore, the answer option 'I do not use any music audio platforms' was included. Participants selecting this answer option were not allowed to proceed with the experiment because they did not fulfil the sampling criterion.								Average minutes is a continuous variable and measured the average amount of time spent listening to podcasts per day. An open text field was used so that participants could enter their own estimation of their daily listening time.								Listening behavior is a continuous variable describing the role that podcasts plays in participants' daily life. The corresponding question in the survey experiment asked participants what their benefits they gained from listening to podcasts. It consisted of 12 items measured on a 5-point Likert scale from strongly disagree to strongly agree. The statements described different user behaviors linked to podcast taken from the Users & Gratifications scale by Perks, Turner & Tollison (2019). 			A manipulation check was added afterwards, in order to check both stimuli presented by asking participants how long they thought the podcast lasted and whether any visual elements were included at all. It was used as a means of testing whether the participants paid attention during the experiment, and whether they perceived the manipulation of the stimuli correctly (Geuens & de Pelsmacker, 2017). In this case, the manipulation check allowed the research to evaluate whether respondents' attitudes were actually measured based on the podcast format they are exposed to. Otherwise, it cannot be stated that their behavior was caused by the presence or absence of the stimuli. The inclusion of the manipulation check is especially relevant in online experiments, due to low control over participants (Geuens & de Pelsmacker, 2017).									The last section of the survey experiment was dedicated to document important demographic variables, a standard procedure in quantitative research (Neuman, 2014). Demographic data was used to compare the experimental conditions and to test whether the procedure of random assignment was successful. The demographic variables used in this research are the following: Age was measured as a continuous variable by asking participants to state the year they were born in an open text field. Age plays a more important role as the other variables, as it is expected to influence the preferred format and therefore contributes to answering H4. 								The categorical variable gender was measured with a multiple-choice question, that included the additional answer categories 'non-binary' and 'prefer not to say'. Education was recorded as the highest level of education participants have obtained by asking a question with six answer categories. Finally, the variable country of residence was used to uncover the location of participants, since the question 'In which country do you currently reside?' bore the least ambiguities. To answer the question, participants could choose the respective country from a comprehensive list
91.2.4 3.4 Pre-test
       Before initiating the data collection, a pre-test was carried out. This section provides information on the procedure, the rationale behind the test and its outcome as well as how it affected the final questionnaire design. The pre-testing phase is carried out in between completing the design of the experiment and data collection, in which a survey is tested and critically reviewed. It is vital to implement the pre-testing phase in the study as a failure to do so can lead to issues in the process. The results of the study may be invalidated during the analysis if these problems are not adjusted during this phase. Additionally, pre-tests are a way of increasing both reliability and validity of the measurement. The importance of including a pre-test stems from the potential mistakes that could occur during the research design (Hooley et al., 2012). Foremost, questions should be posed in a way that eliminates ambiguity and misunderstanding. The positioning of the questions matters, since some questions could lead to biased responses if they are asked in an unfavorable order (Neuman, 2014).			A prerequisite for the experiment to produce reliable results is the deception of participants. They will be introduced to the survey under a false pretense, in order to conceal the real purpose of the experiment. In general, the pre-testing phase is vital to retrieve feedback (Neuman, 2014). For online experiments, it is especially valuable since this method of analysis does not receive direct feedback from participants as much as other methods (Hooley et al., 2012).							When it comes to the visual stimuli included, some issues were encountered during the pre-test. One of the issues that occurred with the video was the design itself. By incorporating a visual approach to the stimuli that was influenced by technological aesthetics, the actual content did not seem to be highlighted to the extent participants wanted or expected, which has been assuaged by restructuring the visual elements and expand the size and quality of visuals. This also aided in creating a more professional overall effect, which was a feature that was commented on by multiple participants. Combatting the feeling like the podcast was created in an amateur fashion is important for the success of the project. If participants do not believe the podcast is realistic or professional, this impact the way they engage with it more as would the actual stimuli under study, potentially invalidating the research. Especially since similar dissatisfactions and issues did not arise from the audio-only podcast and would only increase discrepancies between one of the major variables tested. Fortunately, other issues did not arise from the audio-only podcasts either, confirming the content and podcast itself met the requirements. Another point of feedback which was incorporated concerned the length of the podcast. Since the questionnaire itself already took 10 minutes to complete, the longer podcast of 9.20 minutes would compute to almost 20 minutes. These participants did not have an issue with this, yet feared this might be the case for others because of the randomness of participants and lack of personal ties to the researcher. The shorter podcast of 6.40 was not viewed as too long, and the total time of 16 minutes felt appropriate to these participants. Yet, in order to ensure the length between the revised podcasts still remains relevant, this podcast was shortened and re-released as a 5.5-minute podcast whereas the longer podcast contains 7.5 minutes of content.									In order to diminish the concern for the level of professionalism, an extra question was included in the final version of the survey experiment. As there is a chance the participants still share the sentiments of the pre-test group on the quality, they were asked to assess the quality of the podcast on particular features of interest. In order to measure this, a scale for assessing consumers' perception of media quality was adapted. The scale by Suryani, Fauzi & Nurhadi (2020) mentions clarity, attractiveness, relevance and interaction as the 4 main factors impacting perceived quality. Based on these measures and the feedback provided by the respondents, the measures for clarity and attractiveness specifically were employed in the research to help assess the quality and professionalism of the podcast. In this case, the relevance of the other 2 factors was not found and therefore they were left out of the study as these were concerned with the technical quality of the online platform. After analyzing results, it was found that there is no significant statistical difference between the audio (M = 3.48, SD = .61) and video podcasts (M = 3.53, SD = .59) t (174) = -.58, p = 0.562.			Furthermore, the questionnaire itself was adapted after the feedback. In general, the respondents found the questions and answering options to be clearly outlined and the measuring tools to be adequate for what was being measured. Some of the participants felt that the 7-point Likert scale gave them too many answering options resembling each other which made them feel unsure of their answers. Therefore, all questions that were measured on a 7-point Likert scale were reduced to a 5-point Likert scale. The answering options 'somewhat agree' and 'somewhat disagree' were taken away. On top of that, the order of questions 7 and 8 were altered in order to provide a more transparent and logical questioning sequence. As question 8 originally measured the attitudes the respondents had towards the podcast they just experienced, this question was asked right after the submission of the stimuli in order to provide the most accurate and reliable recollection and opinions from the respondents. On top of that, the 5-point Likert scale also lead to a more responsive mobile viewing experience. The order of the demographic questions was adapted as well. Participants were first asked about their birth year in an open text field and some respondents did not answer this question as they immediately focused on the next question asked as a multiple choice question. The order of the demographic questions was flipped in order to better embed the age question and prevent the question from remaining unanswered.										Since the length of the podcast was mentioned by the participants as a potential pitfall in the final version, a measuring tool for this was incorporated as well. Apart from shortening the podcasts themselves, a timing measure was added through Qualtrics preventing participants to resume without being exposed to the full podcast. The last main feature which was introduced to the survey after pre-testing was an option for playing the video both using a Flash player and one without. One participant was unable to open the corresponding video due to the technical affordances of the phone they used. After the adaptation, participants whose' phone or other device does not respond well with Flashplayer would automatically be submitted to an audio- or video player, respectively in MP3 or MP4 format. 	 
91.2.5 3.5 Research design 
       The final survey was administered after the necessary changes in the pre-testing phase were implemented. The survey consists of six sections, the introduction, the set-up of the cover story, the presentation of the stimulus, measurement of the variables, manipulation checks and demographics. The introduction provided the respondents with general information about the purpose of the study and thanked them for their participation. In this section, the participants were asked to give their informed consent. This option was made mandatory to move onto the next steps in the survey. Then, the participants were asked which audio platforms they use and how many minutes they spend listening to podcasts on weekly average. This section provides background information on the participants and helped eliminate the responses that are invalid if people do not meet the sampling criterion. 			In order to deceive the participants, a cover story with additional questions was asked to the participants. People were told that based on their answers, they would get to listen to a podcast based on their personal preferences and therefore it was geared towards asking questions about participants' behavior when listening to podcasts. Listening behavior, usage purposes and motivations were examined in this section. 										After filling out this section, the participants were administered to one of the conditions. Depending on the condition a participant was assigned to, they were submitted to one of the four adaptation of the podcast. After being exposed to the content, the dependent variable audience engagement was tested. As the User Engagement Scale measures engagement based on 4 factors, for each factor a separate question will be added. Each of these categories represented a factor positively or negatively impacting the level of engagement. Questions on the extent to which participants felt absorbed in the experience and lost track of time, the attractiveness and visual appeal, and both the negative and positive effects associated with the interaction were asked. Measuring the dependent variable before any other variables is vital to limit unwanted influences of the other measurements (Geuens & De Pelsmacker, 2017). After this question, the survey followed one joint path again, as in following sections it was not necessary to divide based on the condition administered. Afterwards, the questions to test the remaining variables motivation and intimacy were tested. Then, two questions measuring the success of the manipulation were asked before the last section uncovered the answers to the demographic questions, asking participants about their age, education, nationality and gender.
91.2.6 3.6 Validity and reliability
       During previous sections the different steps in constructing the survey experiment were evaluated in order to improve the validity and reliability of the measurement. This section dives into these steps to provide insight into how the survey experiment ensured that the relationship between the different concepts are measured as they were intended. Furthermore, the results of the factor analyses are reported.
91.2.6.1 3.6.1 Validity
	Within experimental research, a distinction between internal and external validity is made. Generally, internal validity scores high in this type of study, while the threat of lower external validity is looming (Wharrad & Silcocks, 2009). Internal validity refers to the exclusion of confounding factors to strengthen the capacity of measuring causal effects and is determined by the meaningful interpretation of data collected, while external validity depicts the degree to which effects observed in an artificially created experimental setting can be generalized to real-life situations (Neuman, 2014). 				One way to promote internal validity in the research is the use or adaptation of scales used in previous research. As these have already proven to be valuable, they generate a higher degree of internal validity (Geuens & de Pelsmacker, 2019). Since this research measured audience behavior with multimedia content, the used scales were taken from studies' focusing on the relationship between humanity and digital multimedia as a whole, as well as those specific to news or podcasts. For example, the Users & Gratifications' Scale and Motivation Scale which have been widely used in the field and have themselves been adapted from scales focusing on traditional and mass media entertainment. Furthermore, these studies are all concerned with measuring human behavior and attitudes and therefore related insights can be adapted to this research. Another step taken to reach high internal validity in the research was the inclusion of the pre-test of the stimuli and questionnaire. Without this test, it could not have been assured that changes in the two variables could not be ascribed with full certainty to audience engagement. 										Then, external validity needed to be addressed too. From previous sections, it becomes clear that ensuring this form of validity is more difficult in experiments, especially if they take part online because the situations are hard to replicate in real-life under similar conditions (Neuman, 2014). One solution to this problem was the inclusion of random assignment in the experiment to ensure groups were similar in make-up. In this study, a non-probability sample was used and making use of random assignment can therefore help to combat the lack of representativeness of the overall sample. If participants are assigned randomly to the experimental conditions, the validity of comparisons between these conditions is ensured. 											The manipulation check which was added to check if participants recalled the type of podcast they were exposed to revealed the following results. Out of the respondents submitted to an audio podcast (N = 87), 66 participants (75.9%) were able to correctly recall the podcast format they were submitted to. Out of the respondents submitted to a video-podcast (N = 89), 70 participants (79.5%) were able to verify the podcast format they were submitted to. The second manipulation check which asked participants about the perceived length of the podcasts revealed that the participants submitted to the short format (N = 85) perceived the podcast to be slightly longer as it was (M = 6.06), which simultaneously was the case for respondents (N = 79) whom were exposed to the longer podcast (M = 8.39). 12 respondents across both formats failed to answer this specific question.			
91.2.6.2   3.6.2 Reliability
	Similar to validity, reliability ensures the effectiveness of the research. Reliability is achieved when the measurement tool would produce similar results when carried out by a different researcher. Even though the scales used in this survey experiment have been tested in previous studies, it was useful to verify the reliability of the measurement by conducting factor analyses and reliability checks for the continuous variables. The insights from these analyses provide important information for the data analysis about possible underlying dimensions in the data. In addition, it is shown whether the scales, based on which variables for the analysis are created, were reliable in this research (Pallant, 2005). Before conducting factor analysis, it should be ensured that the data fulfils the requirements. They need to be continuous, normally distributed and each scale should consist of a minimum of three items (Pallant, 2005). In the study, all of these conditions are met.				Intimacy. For this variable a factor analysis was conducted. The 6 items which were measured on a 5-point Likert scale were entered into a factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (> 1.00), KMO = .87, χ2 (N = 176, 15) = 526.30, p < .001. All items loaded onto one factor and the resultant model explained 64.1% of variance in intended behavior. Subsequently, the reliability for all items of the unidimensional scale was tested. It revealed a Cronbach's α of .89, which indicates that the scale has high reliability.					Quality perception. In preparation of the factor analysis, one of the items in this scale had to be reverse coded. This variable was added after the pre-test in order to determine whether the quality of the study impacted people's answers towards their engagement with the podcast. The 5 items which were measured on a 5-point Likert scale were entered into a factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1.00), KMO = .74 χ2 (N = 176, 10) = 184.57, p < .001. All items loaded onto one factor and the resulting model explained 49.0% of variance in quality perception. Furthermore, the reliability for all items of the unidimensional scale was tested. It revealed a Cronbach's of 0.72, which indicates that the reliability of this scale is sufficient. None of the items were deleted, as this action would lead to a lower Cronbach's α in each situation and would bring the reliability analysis under the required minimum of 0.70.						Motivation. The 12 items which were measured on a 5-point Likert scale were entered into a factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1.00) KMO = .80 χ2 (N = 176, 66) = 630.77, p < .001. The resultant model explained 58.2% of the variance. Items loaded onto 3 factors, which are presented in Table 3.1. The factors found were:			Education. The first factor included 3 items ('I can learn something new', 'I can educate myself', 'I can expand my mind') and is reliable with a Cronbach's α of .79. The second factor Convenience included 3 items as well ('I can listen when I want', 'entertainment at convenient times', 'entertainment') and is reliable with a Cronbach's α of .73. The last factor is Storytelling and includes 6 items ('Learning about experiences', 'picturing stories', 'quickly passing time through storytelling', ''make time go by quickly', 'consuming fresh and novel content', 'hearing about other experiences') and is reliable with a Cronbach's α of .71. The item 'I like to hear about the experiences of people who are different from me' loaded onto both the first and the 3rd factor with similar loadings. When using this item, the first factor however, the reliability of Cronbach's α decreased from .79 to .71, whilst it increased the reliability of the 3rd factor to an acceptable level, leading to this item to be included in the 3rd factor. 
Table 3.1: Factor and reliability analysis for Motivation

Edutainment ConvenienceStorytellingI can learn something new from podcasts .80I can educate myself when I listen to podcasts.79I can expand my mind from podcasts.77I can listen to the podcast I want when I want.66Podcasts provide entertainment at times that are convenient for me.82Podcasts are entertaining.76I like to learn about other people's experiences through podcasts.55I can picture the stories told through podcasts in my mind as I listen .53Time passes quickly when I listen to podcasts that feature storytelling .82Podcasts make the time go by quickly.53Podcasts allow me to consume fresh or novel content not otherwise available in the media .46I like to hear about the experiences of people who are different from me.46.45R2
.34.15.09Cronbach's α.79.73.71
       Engagement. The 12 items which were measured on a 5-point Likert scale were entered into a factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1.00) KMO = 0.86 χ2 (N = 175, 66) = 1161.25, p < .001. The resultant model explained 70.4% of the variance. Items loaded onto 3 factors, which are presented in Table 3.2. The first factor Immersion included 6 items (''I lost track of time'', ''I blocked out things around me when I was listening'', ''I was absorbed in the experience'', ''listening was worthwhile'', ''the content incited my curiosity'', ''I felt involved in the podcast'') and is reliable with a Cronbach's α of .89. The second factor, Aesthetics included 3 items (''It is visually appealing'', ''I liked the graphics/images'', ''it appealed to my visual senses'') and is reliable with a Cronbach's α of 0.89. The third factor Control included 3 items (''The experience was demanding'', ''I felt frustrated while listening and I could not do other things'') with a Cronbach's α of .63. In order to increase reliability of this factor, the item, ''I felt frustrated/annoyed/discouraged while listening to this podcast'' was deleted, resulting in a Cronbach's α of 0.69. Although the deletion of this item increased Cronbach's α by the required amount of .05, it unfortunately does not reach the desirable level of .70.
Table 3.2: Factor and reliability analysis for Engagement

Immersion AestheticsControlI was so involved that I lost track of time.77I blocked out things around me when I was listening to this podcast.74I was absorbed in the experience.76Listening was worthwhile.74The content incited my curiosity.78I felt involved in the podcast.70This podcast was aesthetically appealing.70I liked the graphics and images of the podcast .90The podcast appealed to my visual senses .87This experience was demanding.83I could not do some of the things I wanted to do while listening to this podcast.81I felt frustrated/annoyed/discouraged while listening to this podcast.53R2
.45.16.09Cronbach's α.89.88.69
       News consumption. The 10 items which were measured on a 5-point Likert scale were entered into a factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Varimax rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1.00) KMO = 0.75 χ2 (N = 175, 45) = 581.06, p < .001. The resultant model explained 66.1% of the variance. Items loaded onto 3 factors, which are presented in Table 3.3. The first factor, Social, consists of 3 items (To keep up with people, to appear informed, to have something to talk about) and is reliable with a Cronbach's α of .82. The second factor, Information consists of 4 items (to find out what's going on, to make yourself an informed citizen, it helps you learn about others, to help me form opinions) and is reliable with a Cronbach's α of .72. The third factor, Entertainment consists of 3 items (it's exciting, for laughter, because it's a habit I have). It is not reliable with a Cronbach's α of .68. Deleting one item (because it's a habit I have) increases the reliability and results in a Cronbach's α of .75.
Table 3.3: Factor and reliability analysis for news consumption

Social InformationEntertainmentTo keep up with what people around me are talking about.81To appear informed with to the people around me.68To have something to talk about with others.85To find out what's going on in the world.86To make myself an informed citizen.84Because it helps me learn about others.60To help me form opinions on issues.56Because it's exciting .85For laughter .85Because it's a habit that I have.47R2
.35.18.13Cronbach's α.90.89.75







4. Results
       In the following sections, the results of the analyses are reported and explained. The results of the different tests conducted in this study are shown and explained. Furthermore, the hypotheses are scrutinized in this chapter by interpreting them in relation to the research question and literature. Apart from the hypothesized relationships between the podcast formats and audience engagement stated, additional effects will be taken into account as well. 							First, all the direct effects of the independent variable visual stimuli will be examined. In the research model, it was hypothesized that there is a relationship between this variable and the dependent variable audience engagement (''Audience engagement with news is higher when visual stimuli are included''). The corresponding t-test, in which audience engagement is treated as the outcome variable, showed that the overall model of engagement showed significant difference between participants whose podcast did not include a video (M = 2.91, SD = 0.63) and those who did watch a video (M = 3.16, SD = 0.67), t (174) = - 2.51, p = .013. This supports H1, and shows that the video podcast leads to higher engagement.  										When looking at the 3 factors which make up the variable Engagement, the following differences between those that were and were not subjected to the video were as follows, stemming from individual t-tests of the factors. For Immersion, there was not a significant difference between those who did not watch the video (M = 3.10, SD = 0.92) and those who did watch the video (M = 3.35, SD = 0.83), t (174) = - 1.92, p = .057 For Aesthetics, there is a significant difference found between the participants who did not watch the video (M = 2.66, SD = 0.87) and those that did (M = 3.09 SD = 0.98), t (174) = -3.11, p = .002. showing that respondents that were subjected to audiovisual podcast formats reported higher levels of engagement. For Control, there is also no significant difference found between the participants who did not watch the video (M = 2.97, SD = 0.94) and the ones that did (M = 3.02, SD = 1.00), t (174) = -.35 p = .728. 										The lack of significance in the Immersion factor of engagement can be explained by some of the items in this factor representing items similar to those in the intimacy scale, as this partly makes up the way in which audiences engage with the podcast. Control also shows an insignificant difference, which may stem from the setting of the experiment rather than the content and shows a limitation of the experiment study which will be explained further on in the conclusion of this study. Overall, this leads to a partial acceptance of H1. Aesthetics through inclusion of visual stimuli showed to be significantly impacting the assessment of the podcast while Immersion showed a marginal significance and Control showed no significance.  										The next variable under study was the variable Intimacy. It was hypothesized that the participants which listened to an audio-only podcast would feel a greater level of intimacy in their podcast as their counterparts who watched the video simultaneously. The results show that there is a statistical significant difference between the participants who listened to the audio-only podcasts (M = 3.00, SD = 0.80) and those that listened to the audiovisual podcast (M = 2.63, SD = 0.84), t (174) = 3.03, p = .003. In tandem with the theory, the significant differences between audio-only and audiovisual podcasts was expected. Intimacy is one of the most prominent features that make audio podcasts what they are, and differentiate them from other media content available. The participants subjected to the video podcast felt a lower level of intimacy between the producer and themselves as audience as more than one of their senses was being activated. By focusing on images as the story is being told, the participants may have felt a shift in focus which prevented a stronger relationship between their imagination and the story being told. Thus, H2 is accepted. 						Next, podcast length is also hypothesized to have an effect on Engagement. From the literature discussed it is expected that the lengthier podcasts would negatively impact the engagement with the podcast (''Increased podcast length has a negative effect on audience engagement.'') In order to test this, a T-test was conducted in which the 5-minute podcast and the 7-minute podcast were compared. Overall, engagement does not seem to be affected by podcast length to a great extent as no statistical significance was found between short (M = 2.99, SD = 0.67) and long (M = 3.08, SD = 0.65) formats of the podcast, t (174) = -.88, p = .378, and thus leads to the rejection of H3. 					When looking into the factors specifically, the following results were found between the longer and shorter podcast formats. Diving into the specific factor Immersion, the short podcast (M = 3.26, SD = .96) and longer formats (M = 3.19, SD = 0.80), no statistical significance was found either between length and engagement, t (174) = .58, p = .564. Looking at Aesthetics, there is no significance between the short (M = 2.88 SD = 0.95) and long (M = 2.88, SD = 0.96) formats, t (174) = .04 p =.969. 				This can be explained as both short and long podcast formats included a group that did and did not watch a video, and although some additional images were included in the longer format of the podcast, the combination of length and visuals together did not change the Engagement factor itself. Finally, control was measured on its own and showed the following results when looking at the length specifically. In this case, a statistical significance was found between the level of control the participants felt between the short (M = 2.83, SD = 0.94) and the long (M = 3.17, SD = 0.98) was found, t (174) = -2.34, p = .018. This illustrates that the longer the podcast went on, the larger the chance was that participants felt control was an important feature for them when listening, as the increased length might have made them more aware of it. 									In order to test whether age is an influential factor in determining engagement with podcasts, it was hypothesized that younger audiences have a preference for shorter podcast formats, regardless of their inclusion of visual elements. To test this, a new variable for Age was created, comparing the younger and older age groups with each other, cut off by the median of the sample (Mdn = 27).	The interaction effect between the influence of podcast length and age needs to be understood further as per the next hypothesis (''Age has a negative influence on audience engagement with podcasts''). Thus, a Two-Way ANOVA test was conducted in order to compare the 4 different conditions with each other and find out if there are statistical differences between the groups. At first sight, the effect of age on audience engagement does not seem to be substantial. The younger half (M = 3.05, SD = 0.69) and older half (M = 3.01, SD = 0.63) on first sight do not seem to share many differences in the way they engage with the podcasts. The Two-Way ANOVA test furthermore specifies there is no significant statistical difference between groups in terms of length F (1, 172) = .76 p = .386, ηp2 = - .01 The interaction effect between age and length is not significant either F (1, 172) = .00 p = .992 ηp2 = .06. The interaction effect between the groups and Age is shown not to be statistically significant as well F (1,172) = .13, p = .721, ηp2 = .06. Figure 4.1 below show the interaction effect visually. 

Figure 4.1: Interaction effect between podcast length and age.					
       Furthermore, motivations of participants were expected to moderate the effect on audience engagement and thus needs to be scrutinized more in-depth. In order to do so, a regression analysis was conducted comparing the people with high levels of motivation towards those with low levels of motivation (Mdn = 4.03). The test determined that motivation was not a strong predictor for audience engagement F (1, 174) = .568 p = .452, R2 = .00. Therefore, motivation cannot be seen as a moderator of audience engagement through podcast format. Motivation can be divided into different types of motivation as shown on Table 3.2, and are divided similarly to the overall motivation variable. The cut-off points for each of these overall motivations was the median of 4, relevant in Edutainment, Convenience as well as Storytelling. In order to see if any of the specific motivator factors on their own influence.												To test this, a multiple regression analysis with Engagement as the criterion and Edutainment, Convenience and Storytelling as predictor variables. The resulting model explained 4.7% of the variance in the criterion variable and was found to be significant F (3,172) = 2.84, p = .040. R2 = .05 Only Convenience was found to be significant as a separate factor (β = - .25 p = .006), while Storytelling was marginally significant (β = .18 p = .059), and Edutainment was not significant (β = - .04 p = .645). The regression analyses thus also provide a significant effect between the motivator predictors and Engagement and lead us to partially accept H5. 							Another way of interpreting motivation is by diving into the news consumption patterns of the participants. Although this is not a hypothesized value in the study, it may provide some more insights into the goals for which people listen to podcasts and what their effects are on its assessment. The factors presented in Table 3.3 will form the basis for this analysis in order to further explain the results. The overall news consumption model shows significance as type of news consumption the respondents deem as relevant to them impact their level of engagement with the podcast. The regression analysis for this variable shows it to be a good predictor for engagement, F (1,174) = 28.29, p < .001. It had a positive significant influence on Engagement (β = .374, p < .001). The individual factors of news consumption have been scrutinized individually as well. For Social consumption as well as Information they found median was 4. For the factor Entertainment, the median was 3.						To test this, a multiple regression analysis with Engagement as the criterion and Social, Information and Entertainment as predictor variables. The resulting model explained 17.7% of the variance in the criterion variable and was found to be significant F (3,172) = 12.33, p <.001, R2 = - .18 Only Entertainment was found to be significant (β = .37 p <.001), while Social was marginally significant (β = .13 p = .086), and Information was not significant (β = - .02 p = .791). The regression analyses thus also provide a significant effect between the motivator predictors and Engagement and lead us to partially accept H5 in combination with the other statistical results from Motivation. 				Finally, the interaction effect between length and visual stimuli needs to be understood further. Thus, a Two-Way ANOVA test was conducted in order to compare the 4 different conditions with each other and find out if there are statistical differences between the groups. When looking at the statistics for the separate conditions, the results for this are as follows for the 5.5-minute audio podcast (M = 2.95, SD = .62), the 7.5-minute audio podcast (M = 2.86, SD = .65), the 5.5-minute video podcast (M = 3.03, SD = .73) and the 7.5-minute video podcast (M = 3.29, SD = .57). The Two-Way ANOVA test furthermore specifies a significant statistical differences between groups in terms of inclusion of visual stimuli, F (1, 172) = 6.52 p = .012, R2 = .06. The interaction effect between visual stimuli and length is marginally significant F (1, 172) = 3.22 p = .074 R2 = .06. The interaction effect between the groups and podcast length is shown not to be statistically significant F (1,172) = .73, p = .395, R2 = .06. Figure 4.2 below shows the interaction effect visually. 

Figure 4.2: Interaction effect between podcast length and visual stimuli




91.3 5. Conclusion
       In order to provide a cohesive conclusion to this research and to answer the overall research question, the following sections provide an overview of the results and discuss them in the light of the theoretical concepts they relate to. On top of that, this section will reflect on how this thesis contributes to the current knowledge in different areas of research and what its' limitations are. Lastly, indications for future research on this topic are given.
91.3.1 5.1 Discussion
91.3.1.1 5.1.1 Summary of results
	First of all, the findings of the study provide insight into the perceived difference between podcast formats. As was hypothesized, the inclusion of video did impact the level of engagement in comparison to audio-only podcasts. There were 3 main factors that were influential in this regard. Yet only aesthetical choices influenced the participants on its' own as a driver of engagement while the remaining factors were not able to find a direct influence. In line with the multimedia theory of learning, adding visual elements to the story will allow people to better understand more complex news stories by providing extra context in the form of pictures and graphs. Visuals cues have the ability to serve as another manner for audiences to store information more effectively and enhance the overall involvement (Opgenhaffen & D'Haenens, 2011) as was experienced in this study as well. The results therefore highlight the potential for video podcasts to be used more extensively as the difference in engagement scores heavily stems from Aesthetics and can thus be attributed to the stimulation of multiple senses which activates the audience in a comprehensive manner (Mayer, 2014). 			The control factor that was found to be a driver of engagement did not seem to be impacted by the inclusion or exclusion of visual elements and although being a driver for engagement on its own, does not find valid answers to the difference in the format. Kruikemeier, Lecheler & Boyer (2018) already stated that the control variable may not be effective due to contrasting results, as it allows people to filter out news about topics that are not of interest to them, while it can also generate a higher level of engagement with the story if the topic of discussion falls within the field of interest to the listener and intrinsic motivation is involved. Unfortunately, the non-linearity element of which podcasts consist was not able to be proven to effect podcast format itself. In the experiment, a complete real life situation where participants would access the podcast through their preferred platform and at a self-chosen time was not replicable and possibly affected these results.					When discussing the lack of meaningful differences between the podcasts formats stemming from immersion in the story, some important notions need to be taken into account. Part of the way in which immersion manifests itself in the podcast is through the storytelling feature. It is apparent from the results that intimacy plays a large role in this, and thus this aspect of engagement especially needs to be looked at interlinked with intimacy. As theorized, intimacy is one of the main strengths and is part of a few key features that differentiate a podcast in the media landscape (Sienkiewicz & Jaramillo, 2019). The respondents subjected to the video format reported lower levels of intimacy. Even though the video format positively influences engagement, it does so while diminishing a unique selling point of this medium. This does not necessarily present an issue for news podcasts as evidenced by the engagement numbers. Moreover, news podcasts are more so focused on disseminating information rather than immersing the audience in a fantasy world through storytelling so the lack of intimacy did not impact their attitudes towards the podcast on its own.	Intimacy still remains a vital component of podcasts and its' importance to the overall podcasting sphere must not be underestimated, especially within genres that have a different goal, such as with more niche communities. This is significant, especially because part of the intimacy that is felt through podcasts is related to the relationship the producer and audience can share. Since the podcast does not come from an established source, this could have strained the process. However, it also proves that audio as a format is indeed vital in creating a certain feeling in listeners and illustrates how the listening experience feels more integrated as opposed to video format, as it makes the experience more focused and conscious (Swiatek, 2018). The preferential differences in sensory stimulations in the video podcast seem to offset the comparative lack of connection between the visual elements and the story and the link that was provided mattered for listeners to understand the story better and value it more favorably.						Next, the impact of the length of the podcast was further investigated, and its impact can be understood from multiple perspectives. First, it was stated that there would be a negative relationship found between an increase in podcast length and engagement. Corresponding results were not found, diminishing the influence the length of the story had on engagement. We have established inclusion of video favors engagement, yet the effect the amount of extra content exposed to was less relevant. This shows an appreciation for visual elements, yet tells us that its' simple presence outdoes magnitude in numbers as engagement was not impacted directly by podcast length. Immersion in the story was also not impacted by length, showing that format seems to yield more importance in determining behaviors as length. The impact of control over the experience seemed to be more apparent in podcasts that last longer, which supports some claims made previously. Following Groot Kormelink & Costera Meijer's (2019) argument, people need to feel in control over when they are able to access their news, and when a story takes up more time it becomes significantly important for the story to give them a deepened insight into a specific topic. It shows that although length is not as vital of a predictor for engagement as proposed, it does demonstrate increase in length holds value. As the longer video podcast elicited the highest level of engagement, the added depth of the story had a positive effect on audiences. This corresponds to the publics' appreciation for detailed explanation of stories possible through podcasts.   When putting this information in the context of our media landscape, this result is promising as it means producers of podcasts can be more certain additional content in the form of visuals can impact their audiences in a more positive way as would increasing the length of the story. Although the goal is often to get audiences hooked on the produced content for as long as possible, the results show that this doesn't always contribute to actually aiding its perception of quality and leads to a possibility for multiple shorter podcasts being able to produce desirable results. 						Length was furthermore linked to age. In this case, the expectation of age negatively impacting engagement was not met either. First, it has to be stated that the overall age of the participants skewed towards a younger generation in general, with only 11.4% of participants being aged 40 or over, which does not represent the total podcast population completely. Regardless of this, the generational differences that were expected were not in place as much. The gratifications between younger and older audiences were expected to be different, with younger audiences leaning more towards news which is high in entertainment value and older audiences would be more susceptible to opinion-forming and information providing sources. For this reason, the effect of motivation on engagement was taken account as well when discussing these findings. Since entertainment as a consumption goal for news predicted engagement with the news accurately for both younger and older audiences, this seems to be a more accurate predictor as age itself is. Earlier, the overall small differences in total run time were stated as a potential issue with a lack of overall significance concerning length however positive effects can also be derived from it. It may stem from a rather complete integration of the podcast into the lives of a wider audience already with its' growing popularity. This confirms the growing acceptance of podcasts as a type of medium with potential for further exploration. 						Motivations for podcast users have been discussed shortly before, but their significance in predicting engagement in this research needs to be scrutinized further as user motivations were important indicators of engagement. Moreover, control over listening was theorized as influential due to being able to access the podcast on-demand at any place (Papathanassopoulos et al., 2013). Earlier, control was shown to not impact engagement during and after the listening process, but it does play an important role in the earlier stages of the selection process. The lack of non-linearity due to the nature of the experiment and a device in the survey which required participants to watch the full video contradicts with the expectation the podcast listeners may have had. The relevance of controlling what and when you listen may have been impacted by the structure, and reminded respondents of how important this is too them. 										News consumption followed the patterns which were established from the theory, stating that in terms of engagement with podcasts specifically, social and entertainment-based factors are expected to be influential whilst opinion-forming and information seeking motivations would not have such an impact (Lee, 2013), and this expectation was further proven by this study. When combining this finding with the expected motivations across age ranges being similar to the ones theorized, we can more certainly say that age as a distinctive variable being used to group people's media use together may slowly become less relevant and motivation stemming from a specific goal should be trusted more. Podcasting is not a new phenomenon anymore, and neither are older age groups exploring different media. Regardless of age, the internet is considered to be a goal-oriented medium, and therefore the motives for using media through this source are more active comparatively (Mayer, 2014). Information-seeking not being a valuable motivational predictor may be explained through the multimedia theory of learning (Mayer, 2014), as seeking out news stories implies an intrinsic motivation to learn and obtain information. Being a goal-oriented medium, the seeking out of news stories leads participants to expect the information aspect of it to be covered accurately, while entertainment and social reasons are specifically sought out.   										All in all, the interaction between the two main concepts studied provides us with a clear overview of the statements made above. The corresponding results were in line with the rest of the study, and show length to not impact audience engagement. Now, we have more insights into the reasons for this. The study made apparent that the participants subjected to the longer podcast including a video showed the most positive engagement rates, followed by the shorter video podcast. The inclusion of visual elements in both instances had a positive effect and needs to be understood from multiple perspectives. The increase in information by adding a new source seemed to activate some of the aspects that led participants to feel more engaged with the podcast and shows an appreciation for aesthetics in telling a story. From a learning perspective, the participants obtain a clearer picture of the story while inclusion of video simultaneously meets audiences listening goals Since we have found the entertainment and social motivation to be of importance in relation to engagement, it can be stated that visual elements help audiences meet these gratifications more effectively and are representative of capturing a podcast audience. Although length and visual stimuli interlinked showed some relevance for the podcast audience, the large discrepancies between the two opposites of the experimental conditions, the long video podcast contrasted to the short audio podcast, means length cannot be ruled out as insignificant factor all together and is valued to a greater extent in combination with video for its' ability to dive deeper into stories.  
91.3.2 5.2 Conclusions and implications
	The research question of the thesis asked what the influence of visual stimuli and podcast length was on the level of audience engagement with podcasts, in order to figure out the relevance and place that audio-visual podcasts hold within the podcasting spectrum. The experiment which was conducted to test the theories presented results that can have great consequences on the way digital news is presented through this medium. 									The study was able to prove the added value visual stimuli had on the audiences as the difference in levels of engagement between video and audio podcasts was substantial, suggesting the medium could fill an important gap in today's media landscape. The favoring of video podcasts presents the opportunity for news media to better play into the audiences wishes for content based on in-depth reporting and investigate journalism aided by visualizations, as it leads to a more informed citizenry. The long format of video podcasts is able to capture people's attention through the added benefits of multiple senses being stimulated. Yet, the same features increasing a metric often used to gauge success for producers also decrease the impact of a unique selling point of this medium, the level of shared intimacy. Thus, video podcasts should be employed mostly in situations where realism and believability are vital components of successful media content. Alternatively, video podcasts may be approached in a way that does not compromise the valuable contribution of intimacy to podcasting, but rather integrates it within the process of visual stimulation to integrate the findings of this study with the podcasts existing strengths.										Podcast length proved not to be a driver of audience engagement in podcasts, yet this should be interpreted in a positive light. Based on these results, the claim made for young audiences' preferences for short stories is diluted and shows that generational influences are not representative when discussing engagement in news podcasts. Furthermore, it brings advantages for podcasters as it allows them more freedom in producing and experimenting with different lengths of podcasts to test how audiences would evaluate these to better match their needs. Producers of podcasts tend to lean towards extending the podcast length, so the lack of preference for short podcasts is favorable for both sides. Rather than length, entertainment and social goals audiences are expecting to have fulfilled are a better driver of engagement. To capitalize on these findings and build on the opportunities of long video podcasts, the visual stimuli should be interpreted and represented in ways that fulfill these motivational needs for news consumption to elicit the highest levels of audience engagement.			The audience preferences may also imply a change in importance of the podcast in traditional media. The long video podcasts being viewed most favorably can lead more traditional companies to use the podcast as a primary source. Content presented in the podcast could be re-used for other online, or even traditional channels, to increase content distribution in a media savvy way and bring this medium to the forefront.											All in all, the research contributes strongly to the existing literature on podcasts, as well as online news and digital media by uncovering the preferential podcast format amongst audiences. It confirms the overall strengths of immersion and explanation through deep-diving into a story and proves the relevance of the video podcast in news dissemination. By answering the questions posed in this study, audiences are better understood in terms of motivations and preferences and producers are given insights into how these audiences should be reached effectively. Finally, it also provides a direction for how to approach digital news in the current and future media landscape by shedding a light on the incorporation of podcasts as a primary news medium.  
91.3.3 5.3 Limitations
	The research of this thesis has been conducted after assessing the relationships between the concepts which were studied. Furthermore, a plethora of methodological considerations have been taken into account to be able to create a tool of measurement high in validity and reliability and avoiding any confounding factors which may impact the results of the experiment. However, some limitations to this research were still found. This part will provide an overview of the most important limitations which were encountered. 									First, the sampling strategy chosen needs to be critically reviewed because of the combined use of non-probability sampling techniques. These are methods which are generally not recommended for the use in quantitative research because of their inability to generate representative samples. In order to combat this, randomization of participants in each experimental condition is utilized to ensure comparability, and partially balances the disadvantages these sampling methods bring with them. Because of this, using the study to generalize to the whole population need to be done carefully. Second, the platforms accessed to find participants were mostly focused on communities of podcast listeners on various social media, and therefore it is presumed that the participants taking place in the survey experiment already had a pre-existing knowledge and interest in podcasts which motivated them to partake. Therefore, some bias for the participants themselves can occur, since they may be more reflective about how them interact with podcasts in comparison to respondents who are less familiar with it.													Besides that, a number of possible limitations stem from the experimental design itself. It is possible that participants based their ideas on pre-existing notions of video or audiovisual podcasts. If a participant is used to only listening to the podcast through audio and gets assigned to the video-podcast, this may impact their results as the podcast does not reflect the features the audience is used to. In terms of length this is a similar problem. Besides the survey, the participants were also required to listen to the podcast, adding a few extra minutes to the total activity. This results in a total time of 15 minutes, and can have impact on the completion rate.							Moreover, a number of aspects in the survey experiment had to be simplified due to practicality and the time constraints given for this master thesis. It seems like the results have been impacted by that, therefore some of these aspects need to be mentioned. For instance, the visual elements that were included in the final version were less extensive as originally intended. Part of the reason for this was the inability to make use of professional materials, which meant the quality of the visual elements unfortunately dropped and could have a negative effect in their ability to instill audience engagement. To a lesser extent, the audio was also affected by this quality drop, yet this wasn't as impactful as found out through the pre-testing phase. This same phase changed the total runtime of the podcasts to minimize incomplete answers further. On the one hand, that had a positive impact in terms of data collection yet it also resulted in the difference in length having to be adjusted. This did not only lead to less elaborate stories and corresponding visual elements on their own, it also decreased the relative difference in length between the two formats. The resulting differences when discussing length could have therefore been stilted by these circumstances. Seeing as intimacy proved to be an important factor, it also needs to be taken into account that a podcast was produced and was not taken from an existing producer with some brand recognition. 							Furthermore, while the survey experiment was designed with the aim of providing context realism and imitating the process of a real podcast, it is not known with certainty to what degree these measures of increasing external validity were effective. This limitation is mostly connected to the assumptions made regarding the control, or lack thereof, the participants experienced. As their own agency is an important aspect of the listening process, the realism could not be achieved correctly in terms of technical features. Thus, a more elaborate visual design could have for example imitated the interface of an audio platform, or website, through which the podcast can be accessed. Possibly, a feature that made the participants feel more in control over the choice of podcast would have helped too. 
91.3.4 5.4 Future research
       Overall, the insights provided by this thesis emphasize future directions in different areas. The proven benefits of video podcasts could lead to further investigation into this topic. This study was focused on the role of visual elements, yet did not explore the effect of and difference between the potential ways to visualize the news story, or which visual features would garner the most positive response in terms of engagement. Media scholars may look into which visual elements work best in different genres of news podcasting. For example, talk shows might benefit the most from including the host(s), while documentaries or investigate journalism profits more from data visualizations or written texts.												Considering the relevance of intimacy, investigating into which forms of visual stimuli are able to achieve this might make podcasts an even more preferable platform for news consumption. Alternatively, it may show that visual elements circumvent the necessity of tools increasing intimacy, as the aesthetical improvements provide a similar result for engaging audiences. This way, it can be tested if the connection and relationship that is apparent in audio-podcasts can be achieved through video podcasts too. As a result, a wider spectrum of podcast genres would be able to benefit from the engagement activating qualities found through optical enhancement. 						Although this study was not able to prove length as a determining factor for audiences, it is still relevant to investigate into this due to the minimal differences in length among the presented stimuli. As longer podcasts were viewed favorable in combination with video, a similar study could expand on the research by increasing the differences between formats to find out the relevance of length on a wider spectrum. An interesting focus for future research could mean investigating the importance of length when it concerns podcast listeners on the go. Podcast listeners have become more prone to listen to content while performing other tasks or during day-to-day activities which might make them more susceptible to consider time as an important value. The effect of video for these listeners should be researched as well, as the inclusion of video might help with keeping their focus on the podcast more effectively. Alternatively, it may lead to overstimulation of senses for these audiences and therefore have a negative connotation for mobile users. 									Lastly, the use of podcasts as a learning tool could be extended beyond its' current form in the world of language training and education by experimenting with its' format and uncovering ways to integrate it in educational systems more comprehensively. Stimuli like data visualizations might make more abstract courses more understandable and provide alternative forms of studying for individuals who learn best through visual immersion. 
91.4 References
Babbie, E. (2016). The Practice of Social Research. Cengage Learning.
Djerf-Pierre, M., Lindgren, M., & Budinski, M. A. (2019). The role of journalism on YouTube: Audience engagement with 'Superbug' reporting. Media and Communication, 7(1), 235-247. https://doi.org/10.17645/mac.v7i1.1758 
Edison Research & Triton Digital. (2020). The infinite dial 2020. Retrieved from http://www.edisonresearch.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/The-Infinite-Dial-2020-U.S.-Edison-Research.pdf 
Facebook. (2021). facebook.com: search results - podcast. Retrieved from https://www.facebook.com/search/groups/?q=podcast 
Favaro, L. (2017). Mediating intimacy online: Authenticity, magazines and chasing the clicks. Journal of Gender Studies, 26(3), 321-334. https://doi.org/10.1080/09589236.2017.1280385
Futuri Media. (2019). Today's podcast listener: 2019 national survey report. Retrieved from https://web.tresorit.com/l#KqPiA_b5Ruf3Zz2j-9f81Q&viewer=nIk5Lx5cklR3Mt7zUvxnGBFr9W458BZt 
Geuens, M., & De Pelsmacker, P. (2017). Planning and conducting experimental advertising research and questionnaire design. Journal of Advertising, 46(1), 83-100. https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2016.1225233 
Groot Kormelink, T., & Costera Meijer, I. (2019). A user perspective on time spent: Temporal experiences of everyday news use. Journalism Studies, 21(2), 271-286. https://doi.org/10.1080/1461670x.2019.1639538
Gutsche, R. E. (2019). The state and future of television news studies: Theoretical perspectives, methodological problems, and practice. Journalism Practice, 13(9), 1034-1041. https://doi.org/10.1080/17512786.2019.1644965 
Hancock, D., & McMurtry, L. (2018). 'I know what a podcast is': Post-Serial fiction and podcast media identity. Podcasting, 81-105. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-90056-8_5 
Hew, K. F. (2008). Use of audio podcast in K-12 and higher education: A review of research topics and methodologies. Educational Technology Research and Development, 57(3), 333-357. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-008-9108-3
Hooley, T., Marriott, J., & Wellens, J. (2012). Online experiments. What is Online Research? : Using the Internet for Social Science Research, 91-105. https://doi.org/10.5040/9781849665544.ch-007 
Kennedy, H., Weber, W., & Engebretsen, M. (2020). Data visualization and transparency in the news. Data Visualization in Society, 169-186. https://doi.org/10.1515/9789048543137-015 
Koivunen-Niemi, L., & Masoodian, M. (2019). Visualizing narrative patterns in online news media. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 79(1-2), 919-946. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-019-08186-9 
Krebs, I., & Lischka, J. A. (2017). Is audience engagement worth the buzz? The value of audience engagement, comment reading, and content for online news brands. Journalism, 20(6), 714-732. https://doi.org/10.1177/1464884916689277 
Kruikemeier, S., Lecheler, S., & Boyer, M. M. (2017). Learning from news on different media platforms: An Eye-Tracking experiment. Political Communication, 35(1), 75-96. https://doi.org/10.1080/10584609.2017.1388310
Lang, A., Shin, M., Bradley, S. D., Wang, Z., Lee, S., & Potter, D. (2005). Wait! Don't turn that dial! More excitement to come! The effects of story length and production pacing in local television news on channel changing behavior and information processing in a free choice environment. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 49(1), 3-22. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15506878jobem4901_2 
Lee, A. M. (2013). News audiences revisited: Theorizing the link between audience motivations and news consumption. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 57(3), 300-317. https://doi.org/10.1080/08838151.2013.816712 
Lipsey, M. W. (1990). The experimental paradigm. Evaluation Practice, 11(1), 99-100. https://doi.org/10.1177/109821409001100118
Llinares, D., Fox, N., & Berry, R. (2018). Introduction: Podcasting and Podcasts-Paarameters of a new aural culture. Podcasting, 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-90056-8_1 
Markman, K. M. (2015). Considerations-Reflections and future Research. Everything old is new again: Podcasting as radio's revival. Journal of Radio & Audio Media, 22(2), 240-243. https://doi.org/10.1080/19376529.2015.1083376 
Masullo, G.M., Curry, A., & Whipple, K.N. (2019). Building trust: What works for news organizations. Center for Media Engagement. Retrieved from https://mediaengagement.org/research/building-trust 
Mayer, R. E. (2014). Cognitive theory of multimedia learning. The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning, 43-71. https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9781139547369.005 
McClung, S., & Johnson, K. (2010). Examining the motives of podcast users. Journal of Radio & Audio Media, 17(1), 82-95. https://doi.org/10.1080/19376521003719391 
Meier, K., Kraus, D., & Michaeler, E. (2018). Audience engagement in a Post-Truth age. Digital Journalism, 6(8), 1052-1063. https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2018.1498295 - 
Morris, J. W., & Patterson, E. (2015). Podcasting and its Apps: Software, Sound, and the Interfaces of Digital Audio. Journal of Radio & Audio Media, 22(2), 220-230. https://doi.org/10.1080/19376529.2015.1083374 
Nelson, J. L. (2019). The next media regime: The pursuit of 'audience engagement' in journalism. Journalism, 146488491986237. https://doi.org/10.1177/1464884919862375 
Neuman, W. L. (2014). Social research methods: Qualitative and quantitative approaches (7. ed., Pearson new internat. ed). Harlow: Pearson
Newman, N., & Gallo, N. (2019). News podcasts and the opportunities for publishers. Reuters. https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/news-podcasts-and-opportunities-publishers
Nielsen. (2021). Podcasting today: Insights for podcast advertisers. https://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/report/2021/podcasting-today/ 
O'Brien, H., & Cairns, P. (2015). An empirical evaluation of the user engagement scale (UES) in online news environments. Information Processing & Management, 51(4), 413-427. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2015.03.003 
Opgenhaffen, M., & D'Haenens, L. (2011). The impact of online news features on learning from news: A knowledge experiment. International Journal of Internet Science, 6(1), 8-28. Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/publication/235436075_The_Impact_of_Online_News_Features_on_Learning_from_News_A_Knowledge_Experiment 
Pallant, J. (2005). SPSS survival manual: A step by step guide to data analysis using SPSS for Windows (Version 12). Crows Nest, NSW, Australia: Allen & Unwin.
Papathanassopoulos, S., Coen, S., Curran, J., Aalberg, T., Rowe, D., Jones, P., Rojas, H., & Tiffen, R. (2013). Online threat, but television is still dominant. Journalism Practice, 7(6), 690-704. https://doi.org/10.1080/17512786.2012.761324
Perks, L. G., Turner, J. S., & Tollison, A. C. (2019). Podcast Uses and Gratifications Scale Development. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 63(4), 617-634. https://doi.org/10.1080/08838151.2019.1688817
Reddit. (2021). reddit.com: search results - podcast. Retrieved from https://www.reddit.com/search/?q=podcast&type=sr%2Cuser&sort=top 
Şendağ, S., Gedik, N., & Toker, S. (2018). Impact of repetitive listening, listening-aid and podcast length on EFL podcast listening. Computers & Education, 125, 273-283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2018.06.019 
Shahid, S., & Zuraina, A. (2017). Finding the best length of video-podcasts: Effects of varied numbers of video-podcast used on listening comprehension of Saudi undergraduates. International Journal of Novel Research in Education and Learning,4(5),19-31. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.891447 
Sienkiewicz, M., & Jaramillo, D. L. (2019). Podcasting, the intimate self, and the public sphere. Popular Communication, 17(4), 268-272. https://doi.org/10.1080/15405702.2019.1667997 
Sterba, S. K., & Foster, E. M. (2011). Self-selected sample. In P. J. Lavrakas (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Survey Research Methods (pp. 807-808). Retrieved from http://methods.sagepub.com/base/download/ReferenceEntry/encyclopedia-of-surveyresearch-methods/n526.xml  
Suryani, T., Fauzi, A. A., & Nurhadi, M. (2020). SOME-Q: A model development and testing for assessing the consumers' perception of social media quality of small Medium-Sized enterprises (SMEs). Journal of Relationship Marketing, 20(1), 62-90. https://doi.org/10.1080/15332667.2020.1717277 
Swiatek, L. (2018). The podcast as an intimate bridging medium. Podcasting, 173-187. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-90056-8_9 
Wharrad, H., & Silcocks, P. (2009). Experimental design. National Institute for Health Research, 1-41. Retrieved from https://www.rds-yh.nihr.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/2_Experimental_Design_Revision_2009.pdf
Wilner, T., Montiel Valle, D. A., & Masullo, G.M. (2019). What people want to know about the news. Center for Media Engagement. Retrieved from https://mediaengagement.org/research/what-people-want-to-know 
Wormald, B. (2012). Video Length. Pew Research Center's Journalism Project. Retrieved from https://www.journalism.org/2012/07/16/video-length/ 
Wrather, K. (2016). Making 'Maximum Fun' for fans: Examining podcast listener participation online. Radio Journal: International Studies in Broadcast & Audio Media, 14(1), 43-63. https://doi.org/10.1386/rjao.14.1.43_1 
Yoo, C. Y. (2011). Modeling audience interactivity as the gratification-seeking process in online newspapers. Communication Theory, 21(1), 67-89. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2885.2010.01376.x 
91.4.1 


91.5 
91.6 
91.7 
91.8 

91.9 Appendix A: Questionnaire
First, let me introduce myself. My name is Jeroen de Waal and I'm inviting you to participate in a research about podcasts. I am currently studying Media, Culture & Society at the Erasmus University in Rotterdam and am carrying out a study on audience behavior in podcasts. More specifically, I am interested in finding out how listeners evaluate certain podcast features and what their impact is on listening behavior. 
 
 Please answer the questions based on your own opinion and experience, there are no wrong answers. The survey and experiment will take approximately 15 minutes in total. It is important to me that your privacy and the confidentiality of your answers remain, so all answers are recorded and processed anonymously. The answers will solely be utilized for the purposes of this research.
 
 If you have decided to accept to participate in this project, please understand your participation is voluntary and you have the right to withdraw your consent or discontinue participation at any time without penalty. If you have questions about your rights as a study participant or are dissatisfied at any time with any aspect of this study, you may contact me -anonymously, if you wish- 540159jw@eur.nl
 
 Many thanks for your participation in this research, all your answers will be very valuable for my study!
 




Q1 By clicking 'I Agree' you confirm that you have read the information above and want to partake in this survey. 
 
 If you sign this consent form, your signature will be the only documentation of your identity. Thus, you do not need to sign this form.
o I Agree 
o I Disagree 


Page Break


Q2 Please select the audio streaming platforms you currently use from the list below. Multiple answers are possible.
▢ Amazon 
▢ Apple Music 
▢ Google Play Music 
▢ Pandora 
▢ SoundCloud 
▢ Spotify 
▢ Stitcher 
▢ YouTube 
▢ Other ________________________________________________
▢ None 



Q3 How many minutes do you listen to podcasts on an average day?

    Q4 For which purposes do you listen to podcasts? Please state how much you agree with the following statements. I listen to podcasts because...
Strongly disagreeDisagreeNeither agree nor disagreeAgreeStrongly agreeI can learn something new from podcasts o o o o o I can educate myself when I listen to podcasts o o o o o I can expand my mind from podcasts o o o o o I can listen to the podcast I want when I want o o o o o Podcasts provide entertainment at times that are convenient for me o o o o o Podcasts are entertaining o o o o o I like to learn about other people's experiences through podcasts o o o o o I can picture the stories told through podcasts in my mind as I listen o o o o o Time passes quickly when I listen to podcasts that feature storytelling o o o o o Podcasts make the time go by quickly o o o o o Podcasts allow me to consume fresh or novel content not otherwise available in the media o o o o o I like to hear about the experiences of people who are different than me o o o o o 



Based on your answers of the previous questions, you will now receive a podcast which is suited to your listening preferences.  Please refrain from carrying out other activities during this time. 
 
 For the best experience, please listen with headphones in and enjoy the podcast!
  
End of Block: Default Question Block

Start of Block: Block 3

You have been selected to listen to an episode of the daily news podcast Newsscape. With short 5-minute audio podcasts, the channel wants to inform citizens on the most intriguing and important issues in today's world.
 
 Please go to the next page to start the podcast!



Browser 
Version 
Operating System 
Screen Resolution 
Flash Version 
Java Support 
User Agent 


Display This Question:
    If If Click to write the question text Flash Version Is Not Equal to  -1

Flashversion Please listen to the audio below. The survey will auto-advance once its' complete.  
Jeroen · Short Audiopod


Display This Question:
    If If Click to write the question text Flash Version Is Equal to  -1

MP4version Please listen to the audio below. The survey will auto-advance once its' complete.  
Jeroen · Short Audiopod



Timing
First Click 
Last Click 
Page Submit 
Click Count 

End of Block: Block 3

Start of Block: Block 4

You have been selected to listen to an episode of the daily news podcast Newsscape. With short 8-minute audio podcasts, the channel wants to inform citizens on some of the most intriguing and important issues of today's world. 
 
 Please go to the next page to start the podcast!


Browser 
Version 
Operating System 
Screen Resolution 
Flash Version 
Java Support 
User Agent 


Display This Question:
    If If Click to write the question text Flash Version Is Not Equal to  -1

Flashversion Please listen to the audio below. The survey will auto-advance once its' complete.  
Jeroen · Long Audiopod


Display This Question:
    If If Click to write the question text Flash Version Is Equal to  -1

MP4Version Please listen to the audio below. The survey will auto-advance once its' complete.  
Jeroen · Long Audiopod


Timing
First Click 
Last Click 
Page Submit 
Click Count 

End of Block: Block 4

Start of Block: Block 5
You have been selected to listen to an episode of the daily news podcast Newsscape. With short 5-minute video podcasts, the channel wants to inform citizens on some of the most intriguing and important issues of today's world. 
 
 Please go to the next page to start the podcast!


Browser 
Version 
Operating System 
Screen Resolution 
Flash Version 
Java Support 
User Agent 


Display This Question:
    If If You have been selected to listen to an episode of the daily news podcast Newsscape. With short 5-... Flash Version Is Not Equal to  -1

Flashversion Please watch the video below. The survey will auto-advance once its' complete.


Display This Question:
    If If You have been selected to listen to an episode of the daily news podcast Newsscape. With short 5-... Flash Version Is Equal to  -1

MP4version Please watch the video below. The survey will auto-advance once its' complete.



Timing
First Click 
Last Click 
Page Submit 
Click Count 

End of Block: Block 5

Start of Block: Block 6

You have been selected to listen to an episode of the daily news podcast Newsscape. With short 8-minute video podcasts, the channel wants to inform citizens on some of the most intriguing and important issues of today's world. 

Please go to the next page to start the podcast!

Browser 
Version 
Operating System 
Screen Resolution 
Flash Version 
Java Support 
User Agent 

Display This Question:
    If If Click to write the question text Flash Version Is Not Equal to  -1

Flashversion Please watch the video below. The survey will auto-advance once its' complete.  

Display This Question:
    If If Click to write the question text Flash Version Is Equal to  -1

MP4version Please watch the video below. The survey will auto-advance once its' complete.  

Timing
First Click 
Last Click 
Page Submit 
Click Count 

Q5 Please indicate to what extent you agree with the following statements about this podcast. 
Strongly disagreeDisagreeNeither agree nor disagreeAgreeStrongly agreeI was so involved in the experience that I lost track of time o o o o o I blocked out things around me when I was listening to this podcast o o o o o I was absorbed in the experience o o o o o This experience was demanding o o o o o I could not do some of the things I wanted to do while listening to this podcast o o o o o I felt frustrated/annoyed/discouraged while listening to this podcast o o o o o This podcast was aesthetically appealing o o o o o I liked the graphics and images of the podcast o o o o o The podcast appealed to my visual senses o o o o o Listening was worthwhile o o o o o The content incited my curiosity o o o o o I felt involved in the podcast o o o o o 


Q6 Please indicate to what extent you agree with the following statements about your listening experience?
Strongly disagreeDisagreeNeither agree nor disagreeAgreeStrongly agreeI lost awareness of the real world while listening o o o o o I lost track of time while listening o o o o o Events in the podcast feel like they are really happening o o o o o Events in the podcast are more vivid/memorable than in real life o o o o o I felt like I was part of the story o o o o o I feel transported into another world o o o o o 


Q7 To what extent do you agree with the following statements about this podcast? 
Strongly disagreeDisagreeNeither agree nor disagreeAgreeStrongly agreeThis podcast displays good quality content o o o o o The podcast appears to be of poor quality o o o o o The information presented by this podcast is reliable o o o o o The information presented by this podcast is easy to understand o o o o o The informatio presented by this podcast is accurate o o o o o 


Q8 To what extent do you consume news for the following purposes? I consume news.....
Strongly disagreeDisagreeNeither agree nor disagreeAgreeStrongly agreeTo find out what's going on in the world o o o o o To make yourself an informed citizen o o o o o Because it helps you learn about others o o o o o Because it's exciting o o o o o For laughter o o o o o Because it's a habit that I have o o o o o To help me form opinions on issues o o o o o To keep up with what people around me are talking about o o o o o To appear informed to those around me o o o o o To have something to talk about with others o o o o o 
Q9 Did the podcast you just listened to include visual elements?
o Yes 
o No 
o I don't remember 

Q10 How long did you think the podcast you listened to was in minutes?
    ________________________________________________________________

Q11 What is your gender?
o Male 
o Female 
o Non-binary / third gender 
o Prefer not to say 



Q12 Please state the year you were born.
    ________________________________________________________________



Q13 What is the highest level of education you have completed?
o Less than high school 
o High school gradaute 
o Trade school 
o Bachelor's degree 
o Master's degree 
o PhD or higher 

Q14 In which country do you currently reside?
▼ Afghanistan ... Zimbabwe

Your answers have been recorded, thank you very much for filling out this survey! Before you exit the survey, I would like to give you some background information on the study to clarify some things.

The purpose of the study was to figure out how manipulation of certain podcast features, in this case the length of the podcast and the inclusion/exclusion of visual stimuli, impacts audience engagement with and learning from the podcast in order to uncover what the best format is for producers of (news)podcast in reaching their audiences and informing the citizenry.

I hope this message clarified any potential confusion that might have come up on your side during the survey. If you have any further questions, comments or complaints, please do not hesitate to get in touch with me (540159jw@student.eur.nl). 

You can close the browser window now.

With kind regards,

Jeroen de Waal


91.10 Appendix B: Transcripts
Short format
Good morning and welcome to today's episode, my name is Jeroen de Waal and you are listening to Newsscape.
On this episode, we will dive into the world of cryptocurrencies by taking a closer look at the trend of digital art sold as NFT's. 
To uncover the popularity of the NFTs, we have to go back to the origin story of cryptocurrencies, and in particular, Bitcoin, which began all the way back in 2008. Bitcoin's founder, Satoshi Nakamoto released this mysterious paper which opted for a decentralized system in which there is a fixed number, set at 21 million bitcoins, of which no more can ever be created. Since this came out around the time the world was in a financial crisis, people weren't convinced of the centralized bank system anymore. Since the decentralized system proposed by Nakamoto was not controlled by a person or institution, but rather was this permission-less distributed computer network, people actually felt it was more trustworthy. 
Still, cryptocurrencies only remained interesting to a small group of people. As its popularity increased, new ways to spend Bitcoin were thought of, some people are buying clothes with it and some websites start accepting it as a form of payment. Other cryptocurrencies also start popping up, most of these, like Dogecoin were not to be taken too seriously, but there is also this movement of people who start using the technology as a base for other things starts developing. Things like, tracking the rights to online content through the technology of the Ethereum block chain. This practice really started taking off in 2017 since people started realizing they could make a lot of money from it. Since 2021, the worth of a stock in Ethereum even tripled, from around 1100 in January to over 3000 at the beginning of May.
What is an NFT?
An NFT is a non-fungible token. Non-fungible refers to the fact that it's a unique token, and cannot be replaced. A bitcoin, for example, is fungible. You can trade one for another and you will have the exact same thing. An NFT on the other hand, is unique and one of a kind. NFTs are tokens that we can use to represent ownership of unique items. 
Before this technology, things that were on the internet were infinitely copy able. The Ethereum block chain though, allows people to brand these digital objects with a certificate of authenticity to say this is the original of this item, and you can't copy or fake the digital signature attached to it. So, the NFT is not the image or the video clip itself. It's the certificate of authenticity that attaches to that thing and links to it.
Anything that is unique and needs provable ownership can be an NFT. A unique digital artwork, a unique sneaker in a limited-run fashion line, an in-game item, an essay, a digital collectible, a domain name, even a ticket that gives you access to an event or a coupon.
The most expensive sale of an NFT artwork, currently sits at €69 million. Even popular memes like Nyan Cat and Overly Attached Girlfriend are worth nearly a million dollars. 
What is the societal impact?
For artists, the rise of the popularity of the NFT can have a huge impact. Artists are now able to sell "true digital originals" and track this closely, monitor their sharing, control billing, and participate transparently in payments from sales. Especially in photographic art, this can have enormous positive consequences for photographers and rights exploiters. that only the person who owns the token is the legal owner of one of these "prints," avoiding the illegal (but common) third-party sharing since the content can no longer be acquired or stolen arbitrarily on the net as before. Besides that, it increases the value of the token (the print) for its exclusivity aspect. 
So why are people buying this?
In the 'offline' world, rich people spend millions of dollars on sculptures and pieces of art for their walls. The NFT is like a new Chanel bag or owning a Picasso. So a large part of why these people want to own an online image or painting can be tracked back to the emotional values tied to it, they give you a certain status. NFTs allow these people to replicate the scarcity that objects can have in the offline world. Yet, there is also a bigger change happening from the rise of NFTs that is linked to this generational transformation that's happening as more of our lives move onto the internet.
We spend so much time in the offline world sort of curating our surroundings and expressing ourselves through the consumption of scarce goods and building identities around the physical objects that we own. And now, with NFTs, that aspect of life can also be online. So maybe the thing that gives you status and identity is not a physical object, maybe it's a token on the block chain.
Thank you for listening, that is all for today. My name is Jeroen de Waal, see you tomorrow!
Long format
Good morning and welcome to today's episode, my name is Jeroen de Waal and you are listening to Newsscape.
On this episode, we will dive into the world of cryptocurrencies by taking a closer look at the trend of digital art sold as NFT's. 
To uncover the popularity of the NFTs, we have to go back to the origin story of cryptocurrencies, and in particular, Bitcoin, which began all the way back in 2008. Bitcoin's founder, Satoshi Nakamoto released this mysterious paper which opted for a decentralized system in which there is a fixed number, set at 21 million bitcoins, of which no more can ever be created. Since this came out around the time the world was in a financial crisis, people weren't convinced of the centralized bank system anymore. Since the decentralized system proposed by Nakamoto was not controlled by a person or institution, but rather was this permission-less distributed computer network, people actually felt it was more trustworthy. 
This worldwide network of computers then can be used to keep track of every Bitcoin transaction ever made. Every time a Bitcoin is bought or sold, the transaction is recorded in this global database, kind of like a Google spreadsheet. Anyone with an internet connection can go on there and view changes that were made making the entire process very public and transparent.
Still, cryptocurrencies only remained interesting to a small group of people. As its popularity increased, new ways to spend Bitcoin were thought of, some people are buying clothes with it and some websites start accepting it as a form of payment. Other cryptocurrencies also start popping up, most of these, like Dogecoin were not to be taken too seriously, but there is also this movement of people who start using the technology as a base for other things starts developing. Things like, tracking the rights to online content through the technology of the Ethereum block chain, this practice really started taking off in 2017 since people started realizing they could make a lot of money from it. Since 2021, the worth of a stock in Ethereum even tripled, from around 1100 in January to over 3000 at the beginning of May.
What is an NFT?
An NFT is a non-fungible token. Non-fungible refers to the fact that it's a unique token, and cannot be replaced. A bitcoin, for example, is fungible. You can trade one for another and you will have the exact same thing. An NFT on the other hand, is unique and one of a kind. NFTs are tokens that we can use to represent ownership of unique items. 
Before this technology, things that were on the internet were infinitely copy able. The Ethereum block chain though, allows people to brand these digital objects with a certificate of authenticity to say this is the original of this item, and you can't copy or fake the digital signature attached to it. So, the NFT is not the image or the video clip itself. It's the certificate of authenticity that attaches to that thing and links to it.
Anything that is unique and needs provable ownership can be an NFT. A unique digital artwork, a unique sneaker in a limited-run fashion line, an in-game item, an essay, a digital collectible, a domain name, even a ticket that gives you access to an event or a coupon.
The most expensive sale of an NFT artwork, currently sits at €69 million. Even popular memes like Nyan Cat and Overly Attached Girlfriend are worth nearly a million dollars. 
How does this work?
When you've obtained the NFT, an auction needs to be set up to sell it. The sale can be set up similar to royalties. When the original artist sells an NFT, and the buyer then resells for a higher amount, the original creator will always get a portion of this sale, which makes it a very lucrative business model for various artists. When you sell physical art, you sell it to someone specifically. With the NFT, you can build it into the code that every time it gets resold, you get a portion of the proceeds. This allows the scarcity that was previously only allocated to physical goods to be replicated in digital goods as well. 
What is the societal impact?
For artists, the rise of the popularity of the NFT can have a huge impact. Artists are now able to sell "true digital originals" and track this closely, monitor their sharing, control billing, and participate transparently in payments from sales. Especially in photographic art, this can have enormous positive consequences for photographers and rights exploiters. that only the person who owns the token is the legal owner of one of these "prints," avoiding the illegal (but common) third-party sharing since the content can no longer be acquired or stolen arbitrarily on the net as before. Besides that, it increases the value of the token (the print) for its exclusivity aspect. 
So why are people buying this?
In the 'offline' world, rich people spend millions of dollars on sculptures and pieces of art for their walls. The NFT is like a new Chanel bag or owning a Picasso. So a large part of why these people want to own an online image or painting can be tracked back to the emotional values tied to it, they give you a certain status. NFTs allow these people to replicate the scarcity that objects can have in the offline world. Yet, there is also a bigger change happening from the rise of NFTs that is linked to this generational transformation that's happening as more of our lives move onto the internet. 
We spend so much time in the offline world sort of curating our surroundings and expressing ourselves through the consumption of scarce goods and building identities around the physical objects that we own. And now, with NFTs, that aspect of life can also be online. So maybe the thing that gives you status and identity is not a physical object, maybe it's a token on the blockchain.
Thank you for listening, that is all for today. My name is Jeroen de Waal, see you tomorrow!
91.11 Appendix C: Visual elements of the podcast

Image 1: Logo Newsscape podcast

Image 2: Original paper explaining bitcoins start.



Image 3: Bidding on the NFT

Image 4: Course of Ethereum stocks

Image 5: Certificate of authenticity

Image 6: Most popular Memes as NFT's

Image 7: NFT auction house

Image 8: Price of NFT over time

Image 9: visualization of the ethereum blockchain







Inclusivity in Exclusivity: 
an analysis of luxury fashion campaigns and consumer perception







Student Name:Sinara IsoyanStudent Number:558839Supervisor:Dr. João Ferreira Gonçalves

Master Media Studies - Media & Creative Industries
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication
Erasmus University Rotterdam


Master's Thesis
June 2020


Inclusivity in Exclusivity: 
an analysis of luxury fashion campaigns and consumer perception


ABSTRACT
Driven by exclusivity and elitism, luxury fashion brands should appropriately integrate racial inclusivity and balance this in their ad campaigns in order to appeal and relate to a wider array of audiences. The fashion industry is predominantly white and is characterized by nepotism, which is problematic in this day and age. To tackle the inherent racism within the industry, some brands feature models of African descent in their advertising campaigns, however, this can be seen by consumers as a symbolic attempt of representation instead of an authentic one. Therefore, this thesis answers the question of how luxury brands communicate racial inclusivity in their ad campaigns and how their consumers perceive it. By examining the various forms of communication utilized in luxury brands' advertising campaigns, the thesis aimed to understand how renowned luxury maisons such as Louis Vuitton, Chanel, Giorgio Armani, Versace, and Christian Dior convey the notion of racial inclusivity without losing the entire concept of exclusivity that has defined brands like these for decades. Guided by Stuart Hall's encoding and decoding theory, this thesis additionally explores how consumers perceive the communication put forward by these brands in regards to racial inclusivity. Through a mixed methods analysis, including a multimodal discourse analysis of 50 photographs from luxury brands' advertising campaigns, and a quantitative survey, the results brought to light three prevailing themes, namely equipoise of power, veiled prejudice, and racial incongruity, prevalent in the communication of luxury fashion brands regarding racial inclusivity. Consumer perception on the racial representation was influenced by both the explicit details of the campaigns, but also by their personal and cultural values and beliefs. A high exposure to events of racism within the past year and how consumers react upon encountering these events played a role on whether they perceived the racial representation in an ad campaign as appropriate. The study also found that consumers hold higher regard for certain luxury brands in terms of their approach to racial representation based on the composition of the ad campaigns presented, as visual elements such as lighting and color made a difference on their perceptions, even if the campaigns possessed similar quantities of models of color.

Keywords: luxury, fashion, advertising, race, representation
92 Table of Contents
1. Introduction	5
1.1. Introduction of the Research Question	5
1.2. Societal Relevance	7
1.3. Scientific Relevance	8
1.4. Summary of the Sections	9
2. Theoretical Framework	10
2.1. Luxury Brands	10
2.2. Consumer Perception	11
2.3. Classicism	14
2.4. Racial Inclusivity in Fashion	16
2.5. Encoding-Decoding	18
3. Methodology	23
3.1. Research Design	23
3.2. Qualitative Analysis	23
3.2.1. Rationale of the Advertisements Chosen	24
3.2.2. Method of Analysis	27
3.3. Quantitative Analysis	28
3.3.1. Measurements	29
3.3.2. Procedure	30
3.3.3. Operationalization	31
3.3.4. Factor Analysis	33
4. Results	38
4.1. Qualitative Analysis	38
4.1.1. Equipoise of power	39
4.1.2. Veiled prejudice	45
4.1.3. Racial Incongruity	49
4.2. Quantitative Analysis	54
4.2.1. Regression Analysis	54
4.2.1. Paired samples t-test	57
5. Conclusion and discussion	58
5.1. Conclusion	58
5.2. Discussion	58
5.3. Limitations	60
5.4. Further Research	61
6. References	62
7. Appendix	72
7.1. Chanel's Ad Campaigns	72
7.2. Christian Dior's Ad Campaigns	75
7.3. Giorgio Armani's Ad Campaigns	81
7.4. Louis Vuitton's Ad Campaigns	85
7.5. Versace's Ad Campaigns	88
7.6. Survey	91























93 1. Introduction 
93.1 1.1. Introduction of the Research Question
      Developing strong and sustainable relationships with stakeholders is one of the vital approaches for organisations to proceed towards their business objectives (Cornelissen, 2007). When done correctly, stakeholders become collaborative partners for organisations, providing political support, economic resources and a plethora of other benefits (Steyn, 2004). For the majority of brands, especially the luxury ones, customers have been the stakeholder group responsible for the brands achieving their long-term goals. This success is heavily dependent on brand loyalty, which is displayed by the high purchase frequency of the customers. Additionally, due to the democratization of luxury brands, the concept of exclusivity is diminishing day by day, as more luxury products are becoming available to the mass market (Chadha & Husband, 2006). Thus, with the shift in the attainability of luxury products, these fashion brands have to make adjustments to their communication strategies and marketing techniques in order to appeal to a wider customer base. Luxury brands have a worldwide presence and are faced with the issue of having to connect with millions of people of different backgrounds and cultures. On that account, luxury brands now have to tread a fine line between retaining their exclusivity while being inclusive of race in their communication. This is one of the principal reasons why luxury brands have started paying close attention to the topic of inclusivity and diversity in their communication strategies, particularly in the past few years as there has been a drastic rise in movements and approaches towards reaching equality, inclusion, and acceptance. Striving to better understand the necessary strategies behind effective inclusive brand communication, this paper will answer the following research question: how do luxury brands communicate racial inclusivity in their ad campaigns, and how does their audience perceive that communication?
      While the luxury brands update their marketing and brand communication tactics in order to be more inclusive and appeal to a wider audience range, it is similarly integral to comprehend how audiences perceive this communication by brands. Advertisement campaigns of luxury fashion brands are the integral form of communication that takes place between the brand and the audience, and therefore, they hold utmost significance to effectively communicate the brand messages and values (Reynolds et al., 1995). Thus, taking into account the influence of advertising, it is no surprise that it is the driving force of marketing and the fundamental element of brand identity (Aaker, 1996). Hence, transmitting messages through advertising campaigns is an efficient way to communicate with the consumer, as it transfers the brand values across and builds relationships with the target audience (Ouwersloot & Tudorica, 2001). Additionally, luxury brand perception holds a significant role in the consumers' purchase intention (Sari & Kusuma, 2014). Therefore, the success and survival of a luxury brand is directly related to how they are perceived by the consumers, as a positive perception will amplify the sales while a negative one can drown the company. Elliott & Cameron (1994) define perception as the set of processes with which individuals discern and decipher the information they receive. Consumers generally possess varying ideas and perceptions about the quality of products depending on demographic and economic factors such as their ages, income levels, and educational backgrounds (Agyekum, 2015). 
      Bagozzi et al. (1999) stated that emotional reactions also contribute to how consumers perceive brands. All of these factors play an integral role in determining what the consumer perception is of a specific luxury brand and the products they offer. As an example, one of the prominent consumer perceptions is that an elevated price is an indicator of high quality, which is why luxury brands boast about the superior quality of their products (Kotler et al., 2001). While price is a significant indicator of consumer perception, there are numerous other factors that actively influence the perception of luxury brands and how it affects consumers' purchasing behaviors. Thus, this thesis aims to comprehend how consumers' purchase intention works in regards to luxury products and how they perceive the racial representation and relate to the models depicted in luxury brand ad campaigns in order to build a solid foundation for this research. Identity representation through advertising campaigns is integral to any fashion brand as advertisements fundamentally govern the ways that people perceive and relate to the brand (Plous & Neptune, 1997). Williamson (1978) further elaborates that the advertisements' omnipresence and inevitability have the ability to culturally impact our modern society. Additionally, the communicative capacities of advertisements are quite influential drivers of social communication (Leiss et al., 1986). It is a well-known fact that humans possess a need for belonging, and when luxury brands depict realistic models of all races in their advertisements, it speaks more to the target audience as they are able to relate to the models, and this, in turn, positively affects their buying behavior. This is because the driving force of success of luxury brands is the desire and profound understanding of identity (Ekinci, 2020). Therefore, while currently luxury brands are attempting to be more inclusive and convey that aspect to the audience, it is crucial to understand whether they are doing so effectively based on how the target audience perceives the communication put forward by brands (Fernandez, 2018). 

93.2 1.2. Societal Relevance
      This thesis dives deep into the communication strategies of several luxury brands that are actively engaging in inclusive brand communication, and analyzes them in terms of how effectively this is done based on their audience's perception and grasp of the communication. Being the leaders and the trendsetters of the industry, luxury fashion brands should be compelling and pertinent in their communication of racial inclusivity in order to inspire the rest of the industry to adopt inclusive communication. Discriminatory crimes, such as the George Floyd incident of 2020, are occurring to this day and galvanizing the public to take action and to partake in global digital protests in support of Black Lives Matter (Hill et al., 2020). Therefore, the matter of racial injustice is far from solved in the current age, and appropriate representation in the media is a necessary step forward in the right direction. Additionally, fashion content found on social media is not solely consumed by individuals interested in fashion, but they are shared a myriad times and, thus, circulated vastly and absorbed by many. Contemporary digital culture consumes an abundance of content every day, and studying whether the content shared by the fashion industry is racially inclusive will shed much needed insight into this exclusive industry that has so often been associated with institutionalized racism (Coker, 2020). This thesis aims to bridge the gap between racial inclusivity and luxury exclusivity, in an attempt to illuminate on how the issue of racism still persists in renowned brands' communication tactics and how consumers perceive this. Moreover, this thesis can be of use to brands looking into the practice of appropriate racially inclusive communication as it not only profoundly analyzes existing ad campaigns in terms of the issue, but also examines how individuals exposed to the ads perceive them. 
93.3 1.3. Scientific Relevance
	While numerous studies have been published with a primal focus on fashion advertisements and racial portrayals, none of them analyzed luxury fashion brands' advertising campaigns in regards to the racial representation and consumer perception. Therefore, this thesis can prove to be useful for players in the fashion industry concerned with inclusive advertising, marketing, and communications. Newman (2017) asserted that the fashion industry fails to reflect the reality of races, as merely a very small percentage of models were black who walked runways during fashion weeks, who were photographed in brand editorials, or featured in advertising campaigns. The research paper discussed how black models were not featured as extensively as white models due to the idea that they did not fit an aesthetic that excluded models of color. Staying within the theme of models featured to walk the runways and be in advertising campaigns, Sadre-Orafai (2016) examined representation within the industry from a body measurement angle, which is a significant topic in fashion, but it does not address the type of representation that this thesis does. Furthermore, print advertising in luxury fashion brands have been visually analyzed to uncover the attributes in their communication practices, particularly in Chanel and Gucci, however, the focus was not on race and on the ways models of color are represented (Kohrs, 2021). Luxury fashion brands are notable for depicting ads in line with their aesthetics and messages, and as a result, a lack of representation sends the message that a massive part of the target audience cannot relate or associate themselves with the brand and its aesthetics. Amatulli et al. (2016) analyzed the aesthetics and personalities that fashion brands portray in their advertising campaigns in fashion magazines, and confirmed that the messages summon prominent symbolic meanings in the brands' consumers. In contrast, this thesis touches upon consumer perception in regards to viewing ad campaigns from luxury fashion brands and elaborated on the racial inclusivity that the brands were communicating. Therefore, while there exist studies on luxury brand communication and racial bias in the fashion industry, this thesis fills the gap between the two aspects by shedding light on how luxury brands' ad campaigns communicate racial inclusivity to their consumers, and how the consumers regard this. The study of these issues is essential for luxury brands appealing to a wider audience, and towards diminishing racial injustice within the fashion industry. 
93.4 1.4. Summary of the Sections
      The next section will be the theoretical framework which covers imperative terms and background information in their entirety in order to build a solid foundation for this thesis. From luxury brand intricacies to racial inclusivity in the fashion industry, the theoretical framework provides necessary details that are utilized in the sections that follow. Furthermore, the methodology section discusses the methods used in the study and the rationale behind these choices. Taking into account that this study employs a mixed methods approach, specifically a multimodal discourse analysis and an online survey, the methodology is extensive in terms of the advertising campaigns chosen for the qualitative analysis, and the participants and scales utilized for the quantitative analysis. Subsequently, all of the data discovered during the analysis are disclosed in the results section with profound depth. Finally, this thesis wraps up in the conclusion, alongside with the limitations faced in the process and additional advice for future research.
94 

95 2. Theoretical Framework
95.1 2.1. Luxury Brands
      Comprehending the nuts and bolts behind luxury brand communication is essential in tackling how luxury brands appeal to their audience in terms of inclusivity and how the audience perceives the communication. Luxury brands are highly exclusive as they have a limited stock of unique products that are on a high price range and therefore inaccessible to the average consumer (Fionda & Moore, 2009). They offer branded goods that consumers perceive as being of the highest quality, offering authentic value in terms of functional and/or emotional benefits, having a prestigious image within the market due to the craftsmanship and artisanship of luxury brands, having a high price and being worth it, and having the ability to inspire a profound connection and relatability with the consumer (Ko et al., 2019). Furthermore, the products offered by luxury brands have a critical criterion, which is having an inherent and unique know-how that usually has to do with either a particular attribute or the overall quality and performance of the product (Dubois & Czellar, 2002). The high exclusivity of luxury brands makes luxury goods innately rare and challenging to obtain, thus making the promotion of luxury goods differ from ordinary goods, since the former is not as extensively advertised as the latter, as discussed in Brand Culture (Schroeder et al., 2010). The book further explores the notion of a communication paradox that is faced by luxury brands, which means that these companies should not extensively advertise their products as that would lead to an over-exposure and therefore diminish the idea of exclusivity and rarity in the perception of the brands' target audiences. Thus, luxury brands have to strategically balance their exposure ration with their awareness needs, in order to effectively communicate their luxury products to the target audience without having a negative impact on their brand image. 
      Luxury brands are inherently prestigious based on the aforementioned factors that differentiate their offered products from the rest in the market. In the eyes of the consumer, luxury is associated with prestige, which is why both "luxury" and "prestige" are interchangeably used to describe brands that hold substantial intangible value (Dubois & Czellar,  2002). Furthermore, consumer perceptions and evaluative judgments on brands are a result of emotional reactions (Bagozzi et al., 1999). A study portrayed that when consumers think of luxury brands, they often associate their products with beauty, refinement, hedonic pleasures and self-indulgence, whether it is private or public (Dubois & Czellar, 2002). Luxury products are therefore not seen as necessary, but sybaritic, and are often characterized by a high price tag (Berry, 1994). However, luxury is a very subjective concept that varies in every geographic location or setting (Phau & Prendergast, 2000). As a result, consumer perceptions of luxury are quite inconsistent across market segments as the definition of indulgence varies greatly (Bian & Forsythe, 2012). This therefore means that there may not exist a clear-cut answer into whether a luxury brand communicates well or not with their audience, as perceptions of consumers vary based on their demographics and social status. Bearing in mind the aforementioned aspects that characterize what luxury is, luxury fashion brands can be defined as brands that create top-quality products distinguished by high prices, limited quantities, unique attributes, and symbolic associations that grant the feeling of opulence and feed the hedonic pleasures of their consumers.
      
95.2 2.2. Consumer Perception
	In the past, markets for luxury brands were majorly saturated in Western countries, but they have increasingly expanded to the East where the novelty rich markets have commenced to dominate (Sherman, 2009). Luxury brand consumers are therefore both from the East and the West, and it is no surprise that their perception of what luxury products entail differs greatly, as there are personal and cultural aspects that come about. Essentially, the majority of luxury brand consumers of both the Eastern countries and the Western purchase luxury products for predominantly symbolic reasons, with the aim to portray their individuality or social goals and status (Vigneron & Johnson, 2004). Wilcox et al. (2009) further argue that consumers who fundamentally purchase luxury products in order to express their individuality and social standing tend to solely purchase real luxury products, instead of opting for counterfeit luxury products, because these types of consumers tend to possess deeply rooted intrinsic values and beliefs of what luxury really is. Essentially, consumers who value expressing themselves through material objects have a tendency to consume products from luxury brands that specifically possess characteristics that are in tune with the consumers' intrinsic values and beliefs (Bian & Forsythe, 2012). This is because the purchase of products from luxury brands channels a sense of prestige, social hierarchy, and an upper-class persona that such consumers wish to exhibit (Nueno & Quelch, 1998). These aspects, otherwise known as central attitudes, inspire consumers to develop profound emotional attachments to luxury brands that depict the same values, because it creates major resonance between a brand and a consumer (Grewal et al., 2004). Therefore, consumers who purchase luxury products do not merely purchase an item, but they buy into a specific dream that is delivered through an effective and distinct communication by the luxury brands (Dubois & Paternault, 1995). 
	Effective communication determines a brand's success and survival within the market, as they need to compellingly target their audience in order to create sales and encourage brand loyalty. However, this concept is slightly tricky with luxury brands, as the perception of a brand's luxury level subjectively depends on the people purchasing and utilizing their products (Kemp, 1998). Additionally, building upon how the idea of luxury varies from one geographical context to the next, Christodoulides et al. (2009) state that luxury and necessity products vary from one society to another because the goods considered as a basic necessity in one country may be considered a luxury in another. Thus, this further emphasizes the entire concept of luxury being subjective and varying from one market to another, as it fundamentally focuses on a hedonic dimension. Moreover, while luxury brands did not heavily rely on advertising in the past, as their entire reputation was built on the idea of exclusivity, this can no longer be considered to be the case. Short-term financial gains are a more accurate depiction of the goals of luxury brands today, as they have to survive within an industry that is being heavily saturated with up-and-coming brands everyday. As a result, luxury brands commenced to utilize mass marketization strategies, which often means that these brands 'over-market' their products which diminishes the idea of exclusivity and appeals to a wider audience (De Barnier et al., 2012). Kapferer (2006) suggests that while there is evidence of democratization occurring within the luxury industry, luxury consumption is still one of the fundamental tactics used to belong to a social class or circle. Thus, a paramount motivation for individuals consuming luxury products is to satiate their hedonic pleasures, which is a factor that allows people to merge themselves with people who possess similar hedonistic needs (Dogan et al., 2018). 
      As previously stated, luxury products are known to be quite expensive and unattainable for the majority of consumers, however, they are the fastest growing sector in recent years (Han et al., 2010). Consumers' expenditures for luxury brand products surged by 50% between the years 1994 and 2004, whereas expenditures for other non-luxury products solely rose by 7% (Keane & McMillan, 2004). Thus, consumption of luxury products remains rapidly growing as the possession of such products allows individuals to belong to a specific social class that is higher on the social spectrum (Kastanakis & Balabanis, 2012). Additionally, luxury brand consumers attain certain social and psychological advantages that can only be obtained through the possession of luxury products (Shukla, 2011). An example of such advantages include the acceptance in high-class social circles, which aids them in establishing their roles within the society (Wang et al., 2012). 
      Audience perceptions of luxury brands dictate how they will approach and behave towards the brand. A relationship between a brand and the consumer is of utmost significance when discussing audience perception, however, luxury brands still have not entirely perfected their approach on inclusivity because of the range of consumers they possess. Essentially, brands fear that by being more inclusive, they may lose control and the enticement of exclusivity (Grassi & Wigley, 2018). Thus, there is a thin line between brands' need to be exclusive and uphold their high status while being inclusive in terms of portraying models of color, and so luxury brands must strive to generate inclusivity in manners that would not compromise the perceived exclusivity of their offerings (Grassi & Wigley, 2018). Furthermore, Dittmar (1992) argues that there exist two sources behind the subjective representations of people, which are the perceptions of objective reality that deal with depiction of the world outside individuals, and the interpretation of symbolic reality which deals with the collection of socially shared symbols that possess definite meanings for all members of a group. This idea translates into how luxury brands communicate with their target audiences through the use of specific symbols which define the symbolic reality, whereas the objective reality deals with how consumers perceive that message. To delve deep into the brand communication of luxury brands in terms of model inclusivity and relatability with the consumer, and the perception of this communication by their consumers, the advertisements of several luxury fashion brands are analyzed throughout this thesis. While luxury brands tend to focus on exclusivity and need to emphasize on that, it is essential for them to focus on how to be more inclusive (Brewer et al., 2012). Moreover, further emphasizing on the importance of brands portraying inclusivity, luxury brands must adopt a multi-ethnic advertising strategy in order to increase the relatability with their audiences, as a large number of their consumers may be the ethnic majority that is underrepresented in the ad campaigns (Strebinger et al., 2017). Thus, embracing a more inclusive strategy in their campaigns and representing a wide array of different models can be a step forward for luxury brands in terms of building stronger relationships with their consumers. 
      An agreeable brand image leads to brand loyalty from the part of consumers, and that leads to the creation of brand equity (Esch et al., 2006). That is why the creation of a solid brand image is a priority for luxury fashion companies. In their campaigns, luxury fashion brands utilize sensory aspects in the forms of color and texture, which are key factors in the assessment of these brands as evidenced by the fact that a myriad of well-known fashion firms, including Chanel, Dior and Louis Vuitton, were in the top 100 list of brands possessing international brand equity (Interbrand, 2020). Kevin Roberts (2005) suggested three dimensions of brand association, namely mystery, sensuality, and intimacy when it comes to fashion brands, and these dimensions are customarily prevalent in luxury fashion brand ad campaigns in order to communicate to the consumer. Mystery is the cognitive part of the brand image that indicates cognitive thoughts, products attributes, symbolic, and psychological meanings of the brand (Chang & Chieng, 2006). Sensuality is the sensory aspect of the brand image, and it reflects how the consumers react to the visual look, scent, or texture of the products offered (Roberts, 2005). And finally, intimacy is the affective dimension that is measured by how the consumers feel the brand's empathy, commitment, and how they feel when owning products from the brand (Roberts, 2005). Roberts (2005) further argued that these dimensions are the fundamental factors that lead to a strong relationship between the brand and the consumer, and thus these factors have to be communicated accordingly by the brands. These factors make up the brand image, and as a result, consumers obtain the entire perception of a brand from their advertisements (Snyder & DeBono, 1985). 
95.3 2.3. Classicism
      The advertisements of luxury brands usually tend to adopt a classical style, in order to reinforce the notion of high-quality artisanship, exclusivity, heritage, and the high value of the luxury products. Ewen (2003) argues that classicism, as discussed by art historians, is the primary phase in a recurring stylistic cycle that commences with simplicity, symmetry, and order, and further transforms into an elaborate and extravagant style. These classicist aspects define luxury fashion products, as in their inherent state they are products that are built on the simple foundation of an item, but are further embellished and designed in a unique manner in order to differentiate them from other, more accessible and less distinctive products available on the markets. Moreover, classicism is associated with artistic movements that correspond with historical periods characterized by wealth and power (Schroeder & Borgerson, 2002). These two characterizations of classicism are essentially what luxury brands attempt to convey to their target audience through the means of strategic brand communication. Classicism represents power, wealth, and taste, and achieves the visual representation of "the power structure in any period, today and yesterday" (Conway & Roenisch, 2006). Luxury brands' campaigns contain a basic composition, unadorned and unembellished, in order to easily direct the attention of consumers on the luxury products; these components of the luxury brand ads are principal factors of relative classicism, which is a style that "rejects outspoken conspicuous consumption" (Schroeder et al., 2010).
      Compelling visual imagery defines the core identity of brands and their advertising strategies. This is why marketing strategists heavily rely on visual storytelling in the form of images as they are acquiescent from the consumer's perspective and, therefore, do not risk being misleading or objectionable (Schroeder, 2008). Visual storytelling used in brands' advertising strategies further revealed the disclosure of social issues because of the representational power that these images hold (Schroeder, 2006). Thus, through visual advertising, brands communicate their brand story with the consumers by revealing and staying relevant with contemporary social issues. Furthermore, brands utilize their advertising in order to resolve cultural contradictions (Schroeder & Zwick, 2004). This is another aspect of brand communication that affects how consumers see the brand, as by resolving cultural contradictions, brands can successfully target a much wider audience and attract new customers. As stated before, luxury brands tend to adopt a classicist style when it comes to their brand communication. This style generally brings about the sense of durability, stability, virtue, and power (O'Gorman & McGrath, 1998). All of these aspects make up the essence of a luxury brand, as through their possession of psychological dimensions and material solutions, they provide those feelings of stability and power to their consumers. However, as mentioned earlier, classicism as a style has been established at a time heavily defined by racial prejudices and power asymmetries (Millar, 2005). Therefore, while luxury brands adapt this style in their advertising campaigns today, they have to do so conscientiously in order to steer clear from representing visual imagery that may come across as offensive or racist to consumers. Nevertheless, classicism is a central cultural referent structure that is utilized by a particular set of brands to convey the message of luxury, power, durability, and is adapted by numerous compound contemporary branding strategies (Schroeder, 2008). Moreover, marketing specialists of luxury brands must tactfully utilize branding concepts in conjunction with culture, politics, and ideology in order to strategically appeal to their consumers without appearing insensitive and losing credibility. That is because the world has become defined by brands, as they play a fundamental role in infusing culture with meaning and thoroughly influencing the present-day society (Schroeder, 2008). Dior's 2021 campaign is an example of a luxury fashion brand adapting a classicist approach in their advertising campaigns. The campaign gathered inspiration from the Renaissance-era painter Caravaggio, and through Chiaroscuro lighting emphasizing the shadows and the lights, it succeeded in the creation of painting-like three-dimensional photographs that resemble works of art (Gordon, 2021). Therefore, these art styles are quite prominent in contemporary ad campaigns by luxury fashion brands. Classicism conveys the idea of high-quality and timelessness that defines these brands and highlights the concept of purchasing a work of art and not just a piece of clothing. 
      
95.4 2.4. Racial Inclusivity in Fashion
	Racism has been embedded in our society in terms of social, cultural, psychological and institutional structures for many years and it severely impacts the individuals affected by it (Hacker, 1992). The fashion industry is overwhelmingly white, as stated by Angela Burt-Murray, the Deputy Editor of Glamour Magazine (Newman, 2017). Despite the industry being one of the major contributors of the entertainment industry, the representation of various races is extremely limited. The levels of black employment within the modeling makes up a limited number, as it is lower than the actual representative number of the population (Wissinger, 2015). During fashion weeks, black models make up a very small percentage of runway models, and additionally, they make up a smaller percentage in big-budget editorial shoots and fashion advertisements (Newman, 2017). As a matter of fact, a study portrayed that only 9% of all models pictured in the full-page photographs of beauty and fashion magazines were black (Newman, 2017). This number portrays and reinforces the notion of tokenism that has been widely prevalent in the fashion industry in the past, and today. Tokenism is defined as "the practice of making only a perfunctory or symbolic effort to do a particular thing, especially by recruiting a small number of people from under-represented groups in order to give the appearance of sexual or racial equality within a workforce" (Simpson & Weiner, 1989). To demonstrate the progress that the fashion industry is making in terms of being more racially inclusive, a study conducted in the 60s demonstrated that black models made up less than 0.3% of the total advertisements of models found in various fashion and beauty magazines such as Life and Vogue (Kassarjian, 1969). A similar study was conducted almost thirty years later which portrayed a slightly higher exposure of black models, however, the number was still quite low and there were gender-related discrepancies noted (Plous & Neptune, 1997). To be more precise, the study concluded that one out of every five advertisements in magazines with a predominantly white woman readership, namely Cosmopolitan and Glamour, contained one black female model and no advertisements in magazines with a predominantly white male readership, namely Esquire and GQ, contained a black female (Plous & Neptune, 1997). However, black male models were solely pictured in 0.8% of advertisements in Cosmopolitan and Glamour and in 6.7% of advertisements in Esquire and GQ (Plous & Neptune, 1997). Thus, while there was a slight increase in racial representation in the fashion industry, it was still quite low, especially in terms of black male representation. Furthermore, the study portrayed that over 60% of advertisements, that contained clothing items covered in animal prints that were patterned after a predatory animal, were represented on black female models (Plous & Neptune, 1997). This concept of cultural appropriation is additionally sustained by the fact that fashion loves black culture, but not black people (Newman, 2017). In 2008, Vogue Italia published a black issue where they solely featured black models across all of the pages of the renowned fashion magazine. However, none of the black models featured portrayed curly or kinky hair that resembles the natural hairstyles of black women, as they were all depicted with aquiline noses, big eyes, oval face shape, and sleek straight hair - portraying black female models with the typical attributes that are associated with white female models (Newman, 2017). Hence, this Vogue issue was quite problematic despite its attempt to appear progressive and appeal to a wider audience demographic, as they emphasized the fact that all of the characteristics possessed by natural black women were effaced in order to conform to the fashion magazine's whitewashed aesthetic (Newman, 2017). An aspect that plays a factor between the choice of a black or white female model is that there is more demand for models of color if they possess thinner lips, smaller noses, and slimmer figures - characteristics that represent the European standard of beauty (Newman, 2017). When several prestigious brands were confronted on the fact that they did not have a fair representation of black models on their runways, the blame was placed on the modeling agencies and casting directors, as brands do not choose the models personally (Givhan, 2013). Luxury brands that did not have black models in their showings in London, Milan and Paris included Giorgio Armani, Versace, Chanel, and so on - were scrutinized for being inappropriate and having a lack of accountability (Givhan, 2013).
	Additionally, the concept of cultural appropriation is significant in the fashion industry as it revolves around brands claiming intellectual property, traditional knowledge, and artifacts from other cultures without giving them credit and getting permission (Scafidi, 2005). A prominent issue that takes many forms, cultural appropriation is the stealing of various cultural patterns or religious symbols, and may involve an offensive representation of a culture and a race (Pozzo, 2020). While some brands may argue that they take inspiration from other cultures with an aim to advocate cultural diversity and showcase an appreciation for other people's traditions and cultures, it often is not perceived in such a way by the people whose culture the brands appropriated (Sharoni, 2016). Numerous cases of cultural appropriation in fashion have been noted throughout the years, such as a Victoria's Secret runway that featured tribal headdresses (Pozzo, 2020), and brands such as Zara and Antropologie incorporating Mexican designs and patterns in their clothing, the action of which the culture minister of Mexico described as a privatisation of "collective property" (Marriott, 2021). Cultural appropriation is considered to be unethical and discriminatory as it further contributes to the issues of institutionalized racism. Particularly in the fashion industry, which is white-dominated, it is a recurring problem as this act encourages the desensitization of respect towards other people's traditions and cultures (Mulvaney, 2013). Therefore, this aspect is integral in a study on racism in fashion, as it is a leading concern prevalent to this day.
95.5 2.5. Encoding-Decoding
	The key media theory used to study brand communication of luxury brands in terms of their portrayal of models, and how the consumer perceives the brand communication, is the encoding and decoding theory coined by Stuart Hall (1991 [1973]). Hall provoked oppositions between popular and high culture and portrayed the ways everyday life impacted communication in the stages of production, distribution and reception of media (Sender & Decherney, 2016). The central concept in this theory is the concept of circulation, which deals with understanding how audiences induce the semiotic codings of texts (Sender & Decherney, 2016). Nowadays, this concept is intensified through the intervention of social media users who actively participate in modern-day journalism online, by partaking in discussions that equilibrate the dominant voice of the political and media organizations hegemonizing the social media platforms (Sender & Decherney, 2016). In 2020, the Black Lives Matter movement gained immense momentum after the death of George Floyd, an African-American male whose death was inflicted by police officers in Minneapolis (Hill et al., 2020). This event ignited nationwide protests, which led to major protests all around the world in support of Black Lives Matter. However, this was not the first time that a black man was killed as a result of police brutality. In 2014, Michael Brown, an unarmed 18-year-old African-American male, was shot to death by a police officer in Ferguson (Halpern & Cobb, 2015). The news outlets reported on this story by portraying a visual of Brown that represented him in a negative light rather than using a photo with his family, which led to an outrage as some social media users even resorted to calling him a "thug" based on that photo alone (Stampler, 2014). As a result, the hashtag #IfTheyGunnedMeDown was trending all over social media that translated to "If they gunned me down, what photo of mine would they use in the news?" where people posted two photos of themselves: one with their families or friends, holding a child, juxtaposed with another photo of them with a drink, wearing a chain necklace (Stampler, 2014). This hashtag shed much needed light on how black men are portrayed in the media, and how this representation does not raise any questions in Americans who regularly watch the news as they have become desensitized to black men being associated with crime (Campbell, 2019). The negative representation of black people dominated the news, and its inherent issues went unchallenged in the media industry (Campbell, 2019). Similarly, the fashion sphere was not entirely inclusive of black models in their ad campaigns and the aftermath of the BLM movement in 2020 sparked necessary conversation in the field. The fashion industry is driven by exclusivity and not inclusivity, as noted from their VIP front row fashion shows and the prevailing nepotism that defines the industry (Coker, 2020). Nevertheless, with the powerful activism of social media, brands can easily get "cancelled" if they communicate ideas that do not go in accordance with what the majority of social media users agree with. 
	The social media posts that stemmed from the deaths of Michael Brown and George Floyd are perfect examples of the role that social media plays in bringing about difficult topics of conversation and challenging the topics often miscommunicated in the media. Hall (1980) confronted the idea of preferred reading of media texts, where "politics of signification" expressed the power of those meanings within cultures. The circulated photos in the case of Michael Brown depict the power of mass media to present anything in the manner they wish to convey, which Hall speaks about when describing the concept of representation, especially when it comes to race and ethnicity. According to Hall (1980), the central key into unraveling the dominating meaning is to analyze the media representations, which is what this thesis essentially tackles by analyzing the ad campaigns to see how they represent black models. Thus, when decoding the media texts, this thesis covers the denotative reading, which is what the producer of the text intended, and the connotative meaning, which is what the message was received to be. By analyzing the ad campaigns, it will be more clear how the leading brands of the fashion industry communicate the notion of inclusivity of different races, in contrast with the survey results that will portray how the audience receives this message. The perceptions of the audiences will have differences based on their personal backgrounds and beliefs, as Stuart Hall proposed that there is an essential correlation between the social situations of individuals and the meanings that they conjure from the media texts (Fiske, 1992). This is how the first hypothesis was formed (H1): stating that participants' high exposure to events of racism throughout the past twelve months has a positive influence on their perception of racial inclusivity in Christian Dior's campaign, which is depicted in a classicist style and features a balance of models of color. Luxury brands are at the top of the fashion industry chain, and therefore they are the driving influencers of the field who present photos the meanings of which serve their interests. Media representations function through the concept of hegemony, where these companies display media texts that reflect the ideologies and interests of the wealthy and the powerful (Gramsci, 1971). There is also the matter of these photos representing the idea of groupthink which does not offer much room for complex interpretations (Barthes, 1972). With brands' ad campaigns, the images represent the values and beliefs of the brands - as a result, a racially inclusive ad campaign would signify the brand's support for diversity. However, when leading companies strive to aim for balance in terms of representation of races, Campbell (1991) argues that this balance is often "a code word for middle American values" and does not represent society as a whole. 
      The thesis looks into the message of the luxury brand advertisements and how the perceptible and concealed features of the ads converge with Stuart Hall's dominant, negotiated, and oppositional reading positions. Furthermore, the thesis studies the encoded messages in luxury brand ads and how the decoding done by the audience may differ for each message based on the audience's cultural, social and gender aspects. The next two hypotheses that look into the audience's cultural and social aspects in regards to how they perceive the ad  campaigns of luxury brands in terms of racial inclusivity are the following: H2 assumes that people who are impulsive in their shopping habits and are doing so more for hedonic reasons perceive the ad campaigns of luxury brands as having good racial representation, as they do not dig deeper and spend time decoding the actual messages. With the same justification in mind, H3 proposes that people who have a passive response when encountering an event of racism are more likely to consider racial representation in luxury fashion brands' campaigns as good. Furthermore, brand communication aids brands in connecting and building a relationship with their target audiences with the purpose of making sales and enforcing brand loyalty, but it also influences consumers, informs and educates them (Pang et al., 2019). That is why once brands become more inclusive, they can aid in fighting the racial injustice present in today's world (Schmidt et al., 2018). Seeing that the research question deals with comparing the communication of fashion luxury brands with how the audience perceives that, the encoding and decoding theory will facilitate the uncovering of various messages from the ads and compare it with how exactly the audience comprehends the said messages. 
      By understanding what a luxury brand entails and how consumers perceive it, the theoretical framework provides insight into the communication that takes place between a brand and its consumer. The style of classicism detailed one of the principal communication methods used by luxury brands to convey their notion of opulence, heritage, and durability, and it was juxtaposed with racial inclusivity in luxury fashion brands' ad campaigns as classicism was developed in an era characterized by racial discrimination. The encoding-decoding theory of Stuart Hall guides the in-depth analysis of the ad campaigns chosen for this study, and casts light on what the brands aimed to communicate and how it was perceived by the audiences. The advertising campaigns of luxury brands with a focus on racial representation and consumer perception is a complex study that requires a profound and systematic methodological approach, which will be elaborated in the next chapter. 
96 

97 3. Methodology
97.1 3.1. Research Design
	The research design of this thesis is meant to provide a pertinent framework for the study. One of the most integral decisions in the research design process was determining how to tackle the research approach, since that determines the entire outcome of the study as it provides the most suitable way to gather data and relevant information. Taking into account that this study explores the advertising campaigns of several luxury brands in order to comprehend how these kinds of brands effectively tackle the relevant issue of racial inclusivity and analyze how their audience perceives this communication, the research design of this study is a mix of quantitative and qualitative methods of analysis. The methods include a survey and content analysis in the form of a multimodal discourse analysis. The utilization of these two methods of obtaining and analyzing data are appropriate as the necessary information that is discovered will be twofold. The surveys gather data relating to consumer perception of luxury brand communication, while the multimodal discourse analysis allows for the profound perusal of how luxury brands communicate their ideas of inclusivity. Both of these methods constructively contribute to finding the answers to the proposed research question, as they aid in obtaining data from both perspectives. 

97.2 3.2. Qualitative Analysis
	The research design initially commences with a qualitative analysis, as 50 photographs from several advertisement campaigns of the following luxury brands: Versace, Louis Vuitton, Chanel, Christian Dior, and Giorgio Armani, are closely inspected in terms of several paramount aspects, such as the presence of racially diverse models, through a visual critical discourse analysis. This interdisciplinary research method views language as a form of social practice, and it contributes to the systematic investigation and collection of implicit and explicit power relations and ideologies (Johnson & McLean, 2020). By analyzing 50 up-to-date, this thesis examines the material and social ramifications of the discourse regarding racial inclusivity in the world of fashion luxury brands. The analysis looks into numerous aspects, which include whether the advertisement of the luxury brand has actively attempted to make the advertisement inclusive in terms of depicting models of various races, the particular wording used, if applicable, that would give additional information on how the brands are trying to effectively communicate racial equality and inclusion. Furthermore, the advertisements analyzed are exclusively of the aforementioned luxury brands that are popular within the sector.

97.2.1 3.2.1. Rationale of the Advertisements Chosen
      Numerous luxury brands were noted to not have included any black models in their fashion shows in Milan, London, and Paris in early 2010s. Among these brands, the most notable ones included Versace, Chanel and Giorgio Armani (Givhan, 2013). As a result, the advertisements that are analyzed throughout this thesis through a critical discourse analysis of the visual semiosis include ad campaigns of these brands, and others like Christian Dior and Louis Vuitton. This thesis covers the analyses of campaigns from the early 2010s, and juxtaposes them with recent campaigns of the same brands from the recent years. Furthermore, these brands were chosen because of their popularity in the industry, and several campaigns were utilized from each brand to depict any changes that occurred between older advertisements and newer ones. 
      Following the criticisms over the lack of black models in their fashion shows, Armani unveiled a collection in the fall of 2016, titled "New Normal." The aim of this campaign was to be inclusive of models from all backgrounds and ages in order to create unity and connect with their audience of various nationalities and races. Depicting models like Liu Wen and Elisa Sednaoui, who are from different cultures and backgrounds, the campaign was striking (Silhouette and Style, 2016). Shot in black and white, the campaign emphasized the notion of equality, by focusing the viewers' attention on the models and accentuating the elegance and timelessness of the models. The next campaign from this brand is their fall 2018 campaign, which featured a group of male and female models dressed in party outfits, in a close circle. This campaign was chosen because it did feature several black models and models of other descent, further building on their idea to be more inclusive. In contrast, the Gift 2020 campaign of Giorgio Armani portrayed no black models whatsoever, despite the fact that the campaign was released months after the BLM movement made headlines. The Gift 2020 campaign featured women clad in luxurious garments and sequins, and men dressed up in upscale suits. It demonstrated the lavish luxury of the Giorgio Armani, however, the lack of representation of non-white models was unforeseen. Several months later, the Spring 2021 collection dropped and the campaign portrayed both a white model and a black model - which proved to be equally inclusive. 
      The next notable luxury brand discussed in this thesis is Chanel. The first campaign analyzed is their 2012 Spring/Summer collection, which is distinguished by its stunning visuals and photography. The campaign was shot by the late Karl Lagerfeld, who was an influential figure in fashion, and it focused on simple and elegant clothing and accessories of the season. The models, a black female and a white female, posed in varying athletic poses in every photograph, and it was entirely shot in black and white. Luxury brands are known for high quality and standing the test of time, and this is evident in the campaign photographs as they are inclusive and beautiful, and do stand the test of time. However, at the same time, the fashion show of Spring 2012 portrayed no black models walking the runway. Additionally, photographs from the last campaign that is analyzed for Chanel is from their 2021 Cruise collection which solely featured Lily-Rose Depp, a white model and the latest face of Chanel.
      A recent campaign that was well-received was Christian Dior's Spring Summer 2021 campaign, shot by Elina Kechichevna. It took inspiration from Caravaggio, the revolutionary 17th century painter, as all of the photographs in the campaign resembled actual works of art (SHOWstudio, 2021). Furthermore, the Dior menswear campaign for Spring/Summer 2021 was designed alongside Amoako Boafo, an artist from Ghana, and the entire catwalk tackled the issue of diversity by solely featuring black male models (De Klerk, 2020). The fashion show sparked up a lot of conversation, especially because it was during the time that the BLM movement was at its peak traction on social media. The representation of models, alongside the clothing designed by Ghanian artist, exhibited an entire side to the luxury fashion brand that was groundbreaking. However, this was not Dior's first feature of black models for their campaigns. In 2015, Rihanna was the first black woman to front a Dior campaign, the visuals of which are analyzed in the next chapter, as it was quite a revolutionary undertaking. This occurred when the brand was being led by Raf Simons, the Belgian designer who enlisted numerous younger names to be the faces of Dior (Milligan, 2015). All of the ad campaigns that are studied for Christian Dior prominently feature black models, which portrays that some brands skilfully represent people of color, while others appear to approach the issue incongruously. 
      Dior, along with other prominent luxury fashion brands, is owned by LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, which is the French multinational luxury corporation and conglomerate specialized in luxury goods. LVMH owns Louis Vuitton, which is why this thesis will also analyze several ad campaigns by them, to explore the similarities and differences of two luxury fashion brands that are owned by the same conglomerate. The ad campaigns chosen for Louis Vuitton are their Spring/Summer 2020 campaigns for both men and women, and their 2012 campaign is used for comparison. 
      Lastly, there are several ad campaigns from Versace that are significant to this study as their portrayal of different races has been quite problematic in the past, and they were also one of the brands that did not feature black models on the catwalk. Two photographs from the brand's Spring/Summer 2011 campaigns were chosen as they represent very specific white models. Moreover, several photographs from Versace's Eros 2012 campaign and their 2013 Spring/Summer campaign are further analyzed as they feature both white models and black models, however the photographs are edited in such a way that the models almost have the same features and skin color. And finally, their Spring/Summer 2021 campaign is looked into, as it portrays the evolution of Versace in terms of appropriate model representation.
      The sampling used for the multimodal discourse analysis of luxury brand advertising campaigns was purposive, as 50 photographs were chosen based on how they tackled representation throughout time. Thus, for example, a Louis Vuitton ad campaign from 2012 was chosen, along with a 2020 campaign to discover the patterns and changes throughout time in regards to racial inclusivity. The juxtaposition of a few campaigns from the same brand over a span of several years allowed for an insightful analysis of the brand's communication tactics of race in accordance with the trends and the social media movements that were prominent each year. Therefore, the 50 photographs used as a sample for the multimodal discourse analysis were purposefully chosen to fit into the criteria of relevance, progression, and conformity with social movements. The five brands chosen for this study are key players in the luxury fashion industry, and they provide a reliable insight into how the leading companies of the sector approach racial representation.

97.2.2 3.2.2. Method of Analysis
      Content analysis is the most suitable way of approaching the analysis of the media text chosen, as it allows for the identification and quantification of paramount categories of visual content, and for the perusal of the prevailing relationship between the categories (Lazović, 2012). By assigning meanings to the visual elements portrayed in the ad campaigns, underlying messages can be brought to light. The multimodal critical discourse analysis, with a focus on visual images, guides the qualitative results, as the advertisements used generally do not contain textual elements. Through the set of tools presented by Machin and Mayr (2012) for visual analyses, the qualitative results section takes into account what the various ideas and values that the objects pictured, from clothing pieces to the mise-en-scène, represent. This analysis is done as transparently and objectively as possible, as it solely analyzes the visual elements and connects them to the concepts explored in the theoretical framework without additional biased interpretations of the contents of the photographs from the campaigns.  
      The industry of luxury fashion has historically conveyed the messages of opulent lifestyles, standing out due to the exclusivity and the uniqueness of the products offered, and buying into a dream of belonging to an elite social class (Dubois & Paternault, 1995). Thus, this industry is known for strategically communicating material interests and selling dreams to their consumers (Von Wachenfeldt, 2019), however, through communicating a certain exclusivity, they may have avoided conveying the notion of inclusivity. As a result, the multimodal discourse analysis contributes towards answering the research question as it fundamentally analyzes how race is represented by the brands and communicated to their audiences. These campaigns, due to their considerable visual content of color, imagery, and in some cases text, often demand for a multimodal discourse analysis (Berger, 2016). Furthermore, since this is a study of fashion campaigns, the garments are also visually analyzed as clothing pieces can indicate "conformity or resistance to socially defined expectations for behavior" (Rubinstein, 2001). This analysis additionally compares ad campaigns from one brand with those of another, in order to find recurring patterns and symbols, as the images often can convey similar messages, or contradict each other (Rose, 2007). 
      As discussed earlier, the principal aim of the qualitative analysis is to uncover the patterns, themes, and visual aspects that characterize the communication tactics of racial inclusivity in the advertising campaigns of luxury brands. Hall's encoding and decoding theory is the foundation behind this analysis, as the negotiated, intended, and oppositional readings help guide it. The intended reading is the explicit visual aspects present in the photographs of the ad campaigns, they can be defined as the media text the luxury brands aim to communicate to their audience. Thus, in the qualitative analysis of the ad campaigns, this represents the elements directly expressed by the luxury brands. In contrast, the audience can dismiss the explicit data and create meanings by themselves, based on their social, cultural, and personal beliefs and values. This is the oppositional reading, and in the multimodal discourse analysis, it is the implicit meaning discovered through the analysis of the visual elements, based on the concepts expounded in the theoretical framework. Lastly, the negotiated reading of the qualitative analysis is the combination of the intended and oppositional readings, the middle ground between what the brands wanted to communicate and what the audience perceived from that communication in regards to racial inclusivity. In the results section, this is seen in the elucidation of the visual elements of the photographs, with a look into how consumers perceive this. As a result, the qualitative results section deals with the explicit meanings of the photographs, contrasted with the implicit meanings derived from the chosen media texts. The visual critical discourse analysis aimed to be completely transparent, avoiding the interference of the personal background of the researcher.
97.3 3.3. Quantitative Analysis
	The next step of the data gathering process for this research paper is through the means of surveying, which is the quantitative method of the study. It is an integral step, as audience engagement in terms of brands' online presence is valuable in comprehending their loyalty and perception of brands (Krebs & Lischka, 2017). The survey was done through Qualtrics, and it was distributed in several ways including: social media, mobile, and email. The technological advancements in the survey collection aid in increasing the ways that the researcher can interact with the respondents, by utilizing an extended range of advertisements, visual content, and a range of such stimuli (Couper, 2005). The survey facilitates the answering of the second part of the research question, which is how the audience of the fashion luxury brands perceive the messages that the brands communicate through their advertisements. Therefore, the survey participants were chosen to be people actively engaged on social media and being aware of fashion luxury brands, thus being either active consumers of luxury products, or active followers of the brands' social media pages, or people who keep up-to-date with the industry.
	This thesis was conducted with research ethics in mind at all times, and strived to avoid bias in all aspects, including in data analysis and interpretation. Furthermore, all of the survey participants consented to take part in the study and had the liberty to stop responding at any given time were they not comfortable with answering the questions. The answers recorded on Qualtrics were completely anonymous to ensure participant integrity and be ethical. 

97.3.1 3.3.1. Measurements
      This thesis aimed to survey 150 participants regarding their luxury fashion consumption and perception of the communication on racial exclusivity based on campaigns of the aforementioned luxury brands. In total, there were 199 participants, however, after data clean-up due to incomplete responses, the total number of participants was 152 (N = 152), which met the aim of the study in terms of the amount of data gathered. Out of all the respondents, there were 111 females making 73.0% percent of the total share, 40 were male, making 26.3% of the total share, and 1 non-binary/third gender. Additionally, there was an option that offered the participants to not share their gender, however, no participant chose that. The participants' ages ranged from 18 to 47 years old, with the average age being 24.07 (SD = 4.36). Thus, while there was a variety of participants of different ages, 131 of them were in their 20s, making up 86.2% of the overall share. This was the ideal age range in terms of diversity but also exposure to current affairs and social movements as the respondents were specifically chosen to be over 18. The majority of the participants, namely 60.5% of them had completed their Bachelor's degree in college, followed by 24.3% of them who completed their Master's degree. This question ensured that the participants were educated, which is an integral aspect prior to asking them on their analysis and interpretation of racial inclusivity in ad campaigns. Participants based in the Netherlands dominated the study with 40.8% of the total sample, followed by participants in Armenia with 12.5%, and those based in the UK and Northern Ireland with 8.6%. The rest of the countries the participants were based in included Germany, Austria, Canada, Denmark, United States of America, Belgium, France, Greece, India, Poland, Portugal, Spain, United Arab Emirates, Argentina, Malaysia, Nepal, New Zealand, Pakistan, Qatar, Sweden, Sri Lanka, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan. Moreover, 93 of the respondents belonged to the White/Caucasian ethnic group totaling 61.2% of the sample, followed by 23 Eastern Asians that made up 15.1% of the sample, and 10 Asian - Indians with 6.6%. The remaining ethnic groups were Hispanic, Black/African-American, Mixed Race, and others, which included Middle Eastern and Cypriot participants. Evidently, the survey participants had diverse backgrounds in terms of ethnicities and countries of residence, to provide increasingly accurate results that would not be solely based on a single location as the recent movements and the protests for racial discriminations (e.g. the BLM movement) have been relevant worldwide through social media (Persio, 2020). Furthermore, the yearly household incomes were asked in order to comprehend the participants' financial abilities and/or inclinations towards the purchase of luxury products. Seeing that most participants were in their 20s, possible students, the modal income was less than €20,000 which was chosen by 46 participants. This was followed by €60,000 to €79,999, which was chosen by 26 participants. Yearly household incomes that were more than €80,000 made up 26.9% of the entire sample.

97.3.2 3.3.2. Procedure
      The survey commenced by asking questions about the respondents' age and background in order to assure that the participants involved are in accordance with this study's expected demographics. It proceeded by asking about their interest and involvement with luxury fashion brands, which further narrowed down the reliability of the study participants. Existing scales were used to effectively gather and understand the data (Munshi, 2014). Additionally, the survey included three photographs from three luxury brands' advertising campaigns, namely from Chanel, Christian Dior, and Louis Vuitton. These photographs were analyzed in the content analysis of this research, and were then used to gather the participants' opinions and perceptions. 
      The survey had participants respond to questions that documented their demographic background, levels of education, purchasing behaviors, perceived racism, and asked them to evaluate three ad campaigns taken from the qualitative analysis section. The data was collected through Qualtrics, and later analyzed through IBM's SPSS statistics tool. This tool was used to conduct all of the necessary analyses, including several factor analyses, simple linear regression analyses and a paired sample t-test. The factor analyses were used to clean up the data in preparation for the succeeding steps, as it grouped information accordingly in order to reveal essential patterns of correlations. Furthermore, following the factor analyses, the following three integral criteria were examined, including the correlations being above .30, the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy being above .60, and Bartlett's Test of Sphericity being significant. Three linear regression analyses and a paired samples t-test were conducted to test the hypotheses.

97.3.3 3.3.3. Operationalization
	Existing scales have been utilized in the survey, as they have been tested previously for reliability and validity, and thus they offer more well-grounded results. Taking into account that this thesis focuses on racial inclusivity in the luxury fashion brand sphere, questions about racial perception and experiences were asked in order to commence with the survey and understand how participants perceive these topics and whether they have encountered events associated with it. 
      Luxury consumption tendencies within the participants was one of the initial steps in this study. However, consumption of luxury products is not as simplistic as it sounds due to the fact that not everybody shares the same concept of what luxury is or of what an elite social circle entails. Dubois and Duquesne (1993) suggest that varying social classes possess their own particular set of cultural values and beliefs that have the power to influence the proclivity of luxury brand consumption. Thus, this section of the survey utilized the Luxury Consumption Tendency Scale (LCTS) in order to decipher the respondents' inclination towards purchasing luxury fashion products, and how pertinent and involved they are within the world of luxury (Dogan et al., 2018). Based on this scale, statements were provided in the survey, where the participants rated their luxury consumption tendencies on a Likert-type 5-point scale ranging from 1 = strongly disagree, to 5 = strongly agree. Some examples of the statements were the following:
"I care more about what a product symbolizes than its functional features."
"I would like to feel that I belong to an exclusive minority through the products I purchase."
      Racism is ubiquitous and detrimental, the effects and perceptions of which should be understood in order to provide a solid foundation for the survey. Initially, the Perceived Racism Scale (PRS) was utilized to measure the participants' perceived exposure to racism (Atkins, 2014). This scale is a nonspatial measure of the prevalence of perceived racism in various domains and it seeks to compute the diverse dimensions of aroused emotions and cognitive appraisals of the participants' personal encounters with racism (Atkins, 2014). The first prompt taken from the Perceived Racism Scale was to ask the participants to state the frequency of them encountering an event of racism in their lifetimes, or within the last year, as an open-ended question. This shed insight into how relevant this topic is to the participants and it was a solid foundation for the questions that follow. The second part of this question prompted the participants to give an emotional response to the last time they have experienced racism, followed by a list of emotions such as anger, anxiety, frustration, where participants rated each emotion on a Likert-type scale from 1 = not at all, and to 5 = extremely (Atkins, 2014). 
      Another scale that was prevalent in the survey is the Racism Reaction Scale (RRS), which was created by Thompson et al. (1990) as a part of a racial awareness activity. A question was asked regarding how the respondents react when they perceive a sight where racism is evident, for example an advertising campaign of a luxury brand that either does not feature any black models, or features them in a problematic manner. Similarly, the participants rated a list of actions, such as "ignore it", "try to change things", among others, on a Likert-type scale from 1 = not at all, and to 5 = extremely.
      The next part of the survey focused on the purchasing behaviors of the respondents, and it utilized the Purchasing Involvement Scale (PIS) developed by Slama and Tashchian (1985). This scale aids in the comprehension and prediction of consumer behavior regarding the brands and the ad campaigns they communicate to their audiences. According to Kassarjian (1981), there are varying consumer types that can be recognized due to the level of their involvement with purchasing, stating that this involvement consequently affects their purchasing behavior. Apart from purchasing involvement, other concepts that require to be identified are shopping enthusiasm and need for cognition, which are all determinants of purchasers' motivation (Schmidt & Spreng, 1996). Shopping emanates various instrumental rewards, such as a bargain price, and experiential rewards, such as enjoying the shopping process (Schmidt & Spreng, 1996). Purchasing involvement does not relate to shopping enthusiasm or need for cognition, and it essentially means that individuals can be actively engaged in purchasing behaviors for the augmentation of satisfaction with the purchase (Schmidt & Spreng, 1996). The general measure of the purchasers' self-relevance of purchasing activities is the entire concept of purchasing involvement (Karaatli, 2015). Thus, with the help of this scale, the following prompts will be asked to the participants: 
      "I feel like I have to browse through many alternatives in order to make sure I get the best product,"
      "I prefer to purchase from brands that portray various models in their ad campaigns, particularly ones I can relate to physically," and so forth. 
The questions will be answered through a Likert-type scale with five choices, from 1 = strongly disagree, to 5 = strongly agree. This section provided insight into the mindset of individuals when they engage in purchasing activities, and it measured their purchasing involvement of the luxury brands that were studied in the qualitative part of this thesis.
      The next part of the survey portrayed three photographs from three ad campaigns from three luxury fashion brands: Chanel, Christian Dior, and Louis Vuitton. The prompt was for the respondents to rate the following statements for each brand and their ad on a Likert-type scale ranging from 1 = strongly disagree, to 5 = strongly agree: 
"This brand comes to mind immediately when i want to purchase a fashion product
"This brand captures the times"
"The design of this brand's ads is really well done," among other similar statements.
All of the aforementioned scales provided a solid foundation for the survey, which aimed to collect reliable results for the answering of the research question.

97.3.4 3.3.4. Factor Analysis
      The first factor analysis done was to identify the emotions felt by participants upon encountering an event of racism, the responses to which were taken from the Perceived Racism Scale by Atkins (2014). The 8 items which were Likert-scale based were entered into factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Direct Oblimin rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1.00), KMO = .81, χ² (N = 152, 28) = 713.09, p < .001. The resultant model explained 70.4% of variance in emotions to racism. Factor loadings of individual items onto the two factors found are presented in Table 3.1. The factors found were:
      Passive Emotions. The first factor included five items that can be described as passive emotions. These included items such as hopelessness, powerlessness, shame, etc.
      Active Emotions. In contrast, this factor included three items that portray active emotions, such as anger and frustration.
A reliability analysis portrayed that the passive emotion group's Cronbach's alpha was .84, while the active emotion group's was .87, signifying that both factors are acceptable.
      
Table 3.1. Factor and reliability analyses for scales for the participants' emotions felt during their latest encounter with an event of racism 
ItemsPassive Emotions Active Emotionsstress.89shame.86powerlessness.72hopelessness.55anxiety.48anger.95frustration.93sadness.66Eigenvalue4.581.06Cronbach's α.84.87
      
      In terms of the reaction to racism scale, the factor analysis is confirmative as it was based on a preexisting scale by Thompson et al. (1990). Similarly, there were 8 Likert-scale based items that were entered into factor analysis using Principal Components extraction with Direct Oblimin rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1.00), KMO = .82, χ² (N = 152, 28) = 593.75, p < .001. The resultant model explained 66.8% of variance in reactions to seeing racist representation in media. Factor loadings of individual items onto the two factors found are presented in Table 3.2. The factors found were:
      Active Reactions. The first factor included six items that can be described as active reactions to racism, such as being angry, speaking up, and trying to change things.
      Passive Reactions. This factor included 2 items that represent passive reactions to racism, including to ignore it or be powerless. The factor analysis demonstrated that powerless had a .63 loading for the active reactions and a .49 loading for the passive reactions, however, I've decided to assign it to passive despite its lower rank as the content better corresponds to that factor.
A reliability analysis portrayed that the active reaction group's Cronbach's alpha was .89, meaning that the factor is acceptable, while the passive reaction group's was .12, which signifies that the items in that factor are not reliable. However, the variables found in this factor analysis were not utilized in the results section, as the previous factor analysis conveyed a similar idea and was more reliable.
	
Table 3.2. Factor and reliability analyses for scales for the participants' reactions upon seeing a racist representation in media
ItemsActive Reactions Passive Reactionsangry.84frustrated.80try to change things.79speak up.79stressed.78sad.76ignore it.83powerless.49Eigenvalue4.191.15Cronbach's α.89.12      
      The final factor analysis measured the participants' purchasing behaviors to identify their purchasing involvement based on the scale by Karaatli (2015). Respondents were asked to respond to 8 statements regarding their purchasing behaviors on a 5-item Likert-scale that scaled from strongly disagree to strongly agree. The 8 statements were analyzed using the Principal Components extraction with Direct Oblimin rotation based on Eigenvalues (>1.00), KMO = .76, χ² (N = 152, 28) = 346.57, p < .001. The resultant model explained 56.6% of variance in the respondents' purchasing behaviors. Factor loadings of individual items onto the two factors found are presented in Table 3.3. The factors found were:
      Impulse Shoppers. This factor included 5 items and identified respondents who shop based on their impulses, and often purchase items based on symbolic reasons instead of functional. Additionally, these respondents wish to belong to exclusive groups with the clothes/accessories they purchase. 
      Educated Buyers. Representing respondents who take more time and put more thought when engaging in purchasing behaviors, as they often prefer ads to be more inclusive for them to be able to identify with the models and shop from the brands. Consisting of 3 items, this factor also depicts respondents who look for unique clothing instead of falling into impulsive purchasing behaviors. 
A reliability analysis portrayed that the impulse shoppers group's Cronbach's alpha was .82, meaning that the factor is acceptable, while the educated buyers group's was .45, meaning that it cannot be accepted.



Table 3.3. Factor and reliability analyses for scales for the participants' purchasing behaviors regarding luxury products
ItemsImpulse ShoppersEducated BuyersI would like to feel that I belong to an exclusive minority through the products I purchase.84I care more about what a products symbolizes than its functional features.84I usually buy products that I do not need physically but rather emotionally.77I prefer an expensive products over a cheap product.69I shop according to my desires, even when I do not need to shop.63I feel like I have to browse through many alternatives in order to make sure I get the best product.81I prefer to purchase from brands that portray various models in their ad campaigns, particularly ones I can relate to physically.66I am interested in products that have unique features that other products do not have.49Eigenvalue3.151.38Cronbach's α.82.4598 
99 

100 4. Results
100.1 4.1. Qualitative Analysis
      For this section of the thesis, 50 individual ads from numerous campaigns of Chanel, Christian Dior, Versace, Giorgio Armani, and Louis Vuitton, were profoundly analyzed in order to discover the recurring themes and patterns over the years. The industry of luxury fashion has historically conveyed the messages of opulent lifestyles, standing out due to the exclusivity and the uniqueness of the products offered, and buying into a dream of belonging to an elite social class (Dubois & Paternault, 1995). Thus, this industry is known for strategically communicating material interests and selling dreams to their consumers (Von Wachenfeldt, 2019), however, through communicating a certain exclusivity, they may have avoided conveying the notion of inclusivity. As a result, this section will contribute towards the answering of the research question as it will fundamentally analyze how race is represented by the brands and communicated to their audiences. Advertisement campaigns from several leading names of the luxury industry were chosen, namely Louis Vuitton, Chanel, Christian Dior, Giorgio Armani, and Versace, due to the fact that these luxury maisons have been around for a very long time and are known for their traditions of craftsmanship and know-how, which is an indicator of their strong reputation within the luxury sector. These campaigns, due to their considerable visual content of color, imagery, and in some cases text, often demand for a multimodal discourse analysis (Berger, 2016). Furthermore, since this is a study of fashion campaigns, the garments will also be visually analyzed as clothing pieces can indicate "conformity or resistance to socially defined expectations for behavior" (Rubinstein, 2001). This analysis additionally compares ad campaigns from one brand with those of another, in order to find recurring patterns and symbols, as the images often can convey similar messages, or contradict each other (Rose, 2007). The list of patterns and themes that were unveiled during the analysis of the advertisement campaigns were extensive, which was then refined into three overarching themes: equipoise of power, veiled prejudice, and racial incongruity. The analysis will initially utilize denotation by describing what the visual materials contain, which will then be followed by connotation, which will encompass what the overall message is received as. 
100.1.1 4.1.1. Equipoise of power
	The term equipoise of power refers to the luxury brands' attempts in communicating an equilibrium of power among the races pictured in their ad campaigns. In a sense, this section focuses on the racial inclusivity found in the campaigns, coupled with the power stances that aim to portray the races as being equal and convey a similar power dynamic between them. As Barthes (1972) argued, the decoding of the ad campaigns may reveal the concept of groupthink, which is what the brands wanted to communicate in general and therefore, this may not result in profoundly complex interpretations. While this section will focus on the portrayal of balance between the races, it is important to keep Campbell's (1991) point in mind, that balance may be depicted but it may not represent the beliefs and values of the entire society. After all, advertisement campaigns are prepared by trained marketing executives, who strategically depict what they wish to communicate to their audience. Nevertheless, the analysis delves deep into the denotations, as well as connotations, which will provide a holistic view of the research question.
	Chanel's Spring/Summer 2012 campaign, shot by the late Karl Lagerfeld, is an exemplary advertisement campaign that possesses the essential visual cues to be assigned to this theme. The images from the campaign are shot entirely in black and white and they portray two models, a black female and a white female, with cropped hair, as they pose in a variety of ballet poses. In two of the images from the campaign, the white model is pictured to wear white, while the black model is pictured to wear black. And in the next two images, both models are seen to wear all-white outfits. Initially, the duality of black and white is highlighted in the campaign, not only due to the clothing being black and white, but also the models, and the black and white photography. There is an equilibrium of power as in three of the four images chosen, both models are of the same height, and positioned in the same fashion: the white model on the right, while the black model on the left. Solely in Figure 4.1, the black model is pictured on the left, and is above the white model, as both are suspended in air, clutching onto the barre. The models create a synchronicitous image in every photo as they mirror each other's elegant poses. The aspect of both races being in sync additionally emphasizes that they possess a similar level of authority and power. Shot in black and white at the beach on a cloudy day, the background is rather gray which instantly draws the viewer's attention to the models and the garments they wear. Additionally, the clothing featured on the campaign is mostly diaphanous and intricately embroidered, which is an indicator of luxury brands and the high quality fabrics utilized in their clothing pieces. The equality in power is also seen in an image where both models are wearing the iconic Chanel tweed blazer in white (Figure 4.1: Chanel's 2012 S/S campaign), paired with a white tweed pencil skirt. This outfit reflects the image of a refined businesswoman, and since both the models are wearing the absolute same thing, it reflects that both black and white women are in power, who should be respected in the workplace as, with the dainty ballerina poses, they hold utter elegance, grace and confidence. Another integral detail in all of the images of this campaign is that both models wear white wristbands and white shoes, sandals and heels. This detail signifies the similar fashion both models are portrayed in, without prejudice.

Figure 4.1: Chanel Spring/Summer 2012 Campaign

      Louis Vuitton's Spring/Summer 2020 Campaign is a prime example of how the times have changed and how the luxury maison has taken steps into communicating racial inclusivity to their consumers. In contrast to their Spring/Summer 2012 Campaign that lacked racial inclusivity, the 2020 campaign stands out due to its strong presence of models of diverse ethnic backgrounds. Both campaigns are equally visually pleasing, with delicate and diaphanous fabrics that convey the notion of luxury and refinement. The 2020 campaign features both white models and black models, with their natural hair colors and hair textures. The hair texture is an integral visual aspect that demonstrates how there is no Westernization of the black models or a beautification of the white models, but rather, they are pictured exactly as they are, in their natural states. Furthermore, all of the models are portrayed wearing similar clothes from the collection, signifying the equality between the individuals pictured. While the female's collection campaign features an equal distribution of white and black models, the campaign for the men's collection of 2020 features predominantly male black models clad in well-tailored suits, with translucent fabrics flowing in the air. The clothing is rather plain, which is why the models wearing them are juxtaposed against a background with heavy prints. Similar to their 2012 campaign, the floral element plays a significant role in the campaign, as it is a known indicator for the spring and summer seasons. Designating Virgil Abloh as Louis Vuitton's artistic director of the men's collections in 2018 was a move towards the right direction in achieving inclusivity within the luxury fashion industry, as he is the third appointed black designer of a luxury French maison (Chin, 2018). The campaigns that followed Abloh's appointment portrayed a new level of racial transparency in the industry, not only in the brand's campaigns but also on the runway (Dike, 2019). 
      Christian Dior's 2021 menswear campaign is in collaboration with a Ghanian artist named Amoako Boafo and it exclusively features black male models, which is the brand's first ever all-black fashion show (De Klerk, 2020). The designs of the apparel are reflections of the artist's paintings, as the works are printed on the clothes themselves. The photographs are taken in natural lighting against a neutral concrete background, which shifts the viewer's attention directly to the model and the clothing. The paintings of black men on light sweaters, worn by black male models, creates a sort of mirroring effect that goes in accordance with the title of the collection, "Portrait of an Artist." Furthermore, apart from the paintings being meticulously printed on the clothing with intricate detailing of the finger painting technique, the collection is also characterized by berets and Breton stripes that showcase the brand's French origin. Thus, Dior's 2021 Spring/Summer menswear campaign is a mix of the maison's French heritage and African artistry. The compositions of the images in this campaign are quite basic in the sense that they are unostentatious, such as the solid gray background against which the models are posing, which is a tactic to focus the viewer's attention directly to the model and the clothes he is wearing as can be seen in Figure 4.2. This aspect in the images conforms to Schroeder et al.'s (2010) point that luxury brands follow the classicist style and that means repudiating explicit conspicuous consumption. There exists a distinct collocation between Dior's 2021 menswear campaign and classicism, as while luxury brands tend to adopt this style to communicate artisanship, wealth, beauty, and refinement, they have to do so in a way that steers clear of the inherent racial prejudice and power asymmetry that defined the era of classicism. By uniquely employing models of African descent and showcasing clothing by a Ghanian artist while using the classicist style of unadorned imagery, the campaign takes advantage of the art style in a revolutionary way that highlights black models, black talent, and black artistry.

Figure 4.2: Amoako Boafo's collaboration with Christian Dior, 2021 menswear campaign
      
      The theme of art remains consistent for the brand's womenswear campaign of the same season, where all of the photographs resemble Renaissance paintings in Caravaggio's style. Chiaroscuro lighting prevails throughout the entire campaign, as the play between light and shadow highlights the clothing of the season. The style reinforces the concepts of luxury, wealth, and exclusivity - which reflects Christian Dior's heritage and denotes a historical period distinguished by wealth and power. Both white and black models are equally portrayed in the campaign, draped in Dior's garments. The 17th century artistic inspiration for the campaign is juxtaposed with modern outfit details such as the woman's power suit and revealing dresses. This mix of classic and modern defines the campaign, and the evident inclusion of black models further highlights the brand's racial transparency, which is an aspect that contradicts the traditional style of classicism. These models are equally distributed throughout the campaign, with poses that complement and mirror the other models. Therefore, the brand adeptly follows Schroeder and Zwick's (2004) theory that advertising imagery contributes towards the resolution of cultural contradictions, as the ad campaign seemingly aims to rectify cultural contradictions. This Spring/Summer 2021 campaign adopts a multi-ethnic approach through a classicist style, which fortifies the relatability the brand is communicating to their audiences - the balanced racial representation and the power symmetry stand out in the scenery adorned by mise-en-scène traditionally archetypal of Renaissance paintings. Half-burnt candles in candelabras, a wide array of exquisitely cut fruit, and substantial fabrics in rich earth toned colors draped on the floors and the dining table, are all details that additionally reflect the style of Caravaggio's paintings. Garments the women are clad in range from delicate dresses that drape the models' bodies, to brocaded full dresses that take up significant space in their overpoweringly intricate patterns. All of the colors in the collection uphold the color scheme of chiaroscuro and Caravaggio's paintings with their deep earthy tones, royal blues, and rich crimsons, as pictured in one of the photographs from the campaign in Figure 4.3. However, while both this campaign and Louis Vuitton's collaboration with the Ghanian artist possess good racial representations, the style of the Renaissance painting does mostly conform to an aesthetic that caters predominantly to white tastes. Therefore, the fourth hypothesis (H4) assumes that the survey participants will identify Louis Vuitton's ad campaign as more racially inclusive than Christian Dior's, upon being exposed to one photograph from each brand's campaign. These patterns and colors are further found on Dior's iconic canvas book bags and the Caro bags, which serve as additional details in the painting-like images of the campaign. 

Figure 4.3: Christian Dior's Spring/Summer 2021 Campaign
      The campaign of Christian Dior's 2021 resort collection also deserves a mention, due to its major presence of black female models who are all pictured in various power poses. The photos were taken against stony backgrounds, which invoke the feelings of ancient European grounds. The setting, as Machin and Mayr (2012) stated, proficiently connotes the ideas and the discourses, the actions and the identities. In this case, the stony European setting creates a colder atmosphere,  which is juxtaposed by the warmth of the burning candles and the warm colors of the clothing. Heavily influenced by the creative director Maria Grazia Chiuri's Italian background, the garments take inspiration from the Puglia region (Carreon, 2021). In three of the images from the campaign, black models are shot individually, two of them wearing golden jeweled headbands that look like crowns, all of them clad in flowy and intricately embellished dresses and brown leather corsets. Two of them are shot sitting on stone steps with a myriad white candles burning around them. One of the models lends against the steps, with her hands spread wide apart, looking directly into the camera. The power she holds is intense, as the candles, the crown, the assertive non-traditionally feminine pose create an unequivocal sense of strength. The other model is shot in the same setting, however, she has her legs crossed as the voluminous ornate skirt of the gown falls around her. She has her hands to the side as she seems to be mid-thought or mid-explanation, and all the focus falls on her. Being photographed still in that position, the black model seems to be holding the room in her hands, making the audience cling onto her next move. The gold headband, the sturdy leather corset, and the hazy smokes from the side of the image further contribute to the depiction of her ferocity. In another image from the campaign, three models are depicted, two of whom are of African descent while one is white, and they are all wearing similar flowy white dresses with daintily detailed Tombolo lace, which is reminiscent of 15th century lace made popular in the South of Italy, and floaty skirts (Carreon, 2021). The white graceful femininity of the dresses is contrasted by the robust brown leather element found in the corset on the white model and the thick belt on the black model. Thus, in both their menswear and womenswear campaigns, Dior strategically utilizes the classicist style in a way that empowers models of African descent and maintains a level of balance and equality that has the power to positively relate to the viewers.
100.1.2 4.1.2. Veiled prejudice
	The theme of veiled prejudice relates to the ad campaigns of luxury brands that have a problematic portrayal of black models that are either racist or simply lack appropriate representation. Marketing executives of luxury brands who design the campaigns, especially in recent years, may be inclined to be "politically correct" and include black models in order to be one with the times and to appear racially inclusive in their communication, however, this may be done in a way that is incongruous or ignorant. Furthermore, this section will cover the notion of tokenism as construed by Simpson and Weiner (1989) that is prevalent in the fashion industry. Cultural appropriation will also be included in this section, as it is a significant theme in the inherently discriminatory activities from various brands within the industry. This theme will additionally encompass the constituents of the images in the campaigns in order to connect them with the theme of veiled prejudice and broader cultural meanings (Dyer, 1982). In advertisement campaigns, storytelling is done through images, and it is important to keep in mind that the story may be more convoluted than what is explicitly portrayed (Berger, 2016). However, Machin and Mayr (2012) argue that the meanings behind advertisements are communicated by visual features, which is what this entire analysis aims to elucidate on without bias.
	Washed ashore at a mystifyingly scintillating beach is the entire essence of Versace's Spring/Summer 2013 campaign. The images portray various male and female models, with only one black female model, as they are photographed in various poses. Paraphernalia relating to the Greek culture is quite significant in this campaign, as seen in the gladiator shoes on both female and male models, the flowy dresses with golden detailing, the golden logo patterned undergarments worn by male models. This aspect highlights the luxury brand's association with Greek mythology, as the logo of Versace is the Medusa - a fitting metaphor for what the brand communicates through their ad campaigns and garments. According to ancient Greek mythology, Medusa was known for having snakes for hair and a gaze so powerful it would turn anyone to stone, literally strike them with absolute terror (Glennon, 2017). Thus, Versace's aim is to empower women and make them appear powerful in their fierce femininity, and be able to manipulate the traditional male gaze (Hengel, 2016). In the campaign, this is reinforced by the fact that the female models are clad in flowing dresses with gold detailing, while the men are solely wearing gladiator sandals and black underwear embellished with golden details of the brand's notable pattern. Thus, the lack of clothing on male models, and the fact that the majority of them are splashed on the sparkling sand while the female models stand in power poses, placed higher and taller than the opposite gender. The problematic representation of the black race is evident in not only the fact that there is only one black model, but by the prevailing issue that while the rest of the models are white but tan, the skin colors are heavily edited to reflect each other. Thus, the black model's skin, as well as the white models' skins, are edited in such a way that they all look as though they have the same skin tone. As a result, for the average viewer, it may be tough to distinguish the races represented in the campaign. Another factor that adds to the darkness of all of the models' skins, is that the shoot represents nighttime with the strong influence of sapphire blue that represents the night sky. Therefore, race gets eclipsed in this campaign. All of the images (see Figure 4.4), are overpowered by the blues, juxtaposed with the warmth of the orange dress of the female model, and the intense scarlet of one of the male model's hair. Additionally, the black model's hair is sleek, straight and long, which is the Western ideal of beauty. The model is, therefore, styled and edited to conform to a Western standard of beauty, that is not characteristic of her race. The representation of the black female model in this campaign goes in accordance with Newman's (2017) statement that brands choose models of color that possess features that define the European standard beauty, such as small noses and slim figures.

Figure 4.4: Versace Spring/Summer 2013 Campaign
	
      Giorgio Armani, despite the brand's persisting prominence in the luxury fashion industry, has been problematic in their representation of models of color for years. In their "New Normal" campaign for Spring/Summer 2016, the designer opted to shoot iconic models from the 90s in a natural state. There are 4 models in the two photos chosen from that campaign. The first photo solely shows four white models, with the wind sweeping their hair back and looking entirely natural. Dressed in all white, the models gaze into the camera with solemn facial expressions. All of the photographs are shot in black and white, to imitate the natural, classic look the campaign was going for. In the second photo, four additional models are pictured, out of whom one is black, one is Asian, and the remaining two are mixed race. Thus, while the first photo consisted of an entirely white model selection, the second one went for a more racially inclusive approach. However, this was not done in a favorable manner and can be deemed problematic due to the following reason: the black model is portrayed wearing a white striped shirt, while the other three models who have light skin are wearing black striped shirts. There is an evident contrast between the models' skin color and what they are wearing, and the fact that the white models in the previous photo were wearing all white, that can deliver the discriminatory message that black models cannot wear black, while white models can wear both colors. However, this isn't the only time Armani problematically portrayed black models in terms of what they are wearing. Emporio Armani's Fall/Winter 2018 campaign encompasses the theme of an office party, with a vast group of men and women of various ages. There are seven female models and five male models, out of whom there is one black female and one black male. The models stand close together, in a line, hugging or leaning into one another. The two black models are placed side by side, while the white, Asian, and mixed race models are spread out evenly. Furthermore, taking into account the fact that it is an office party, all of the male models are wearing formal suits except for the black male who's pictured wearing a black leather jacket. The leather jacket not only stands out amidst all the formal suits, but it makes the black male seem rebellious and delinquent. Additionally, the rest of the male models have their hands around females' waists, while the black male has his hands in his pockets, further highlighting his wayward ways.
	The brand's problematic portrayal of race does not end there. In the Spring/Summer 2021 womenswear campaign of Giorgio Armani, two models are shot side by side, the white model on the left, and the black model on the right. Shot in black and white, the campaign highlights luminous silk fabrics and intricate dainty dresses. The white model is wearing a printed silk suit and is leaning against a wall while looking directly into the camera. Her clothes, her stance, her gaze, and her slicked back straight hair add to a powerful representation of a strong female. With her hands in her pockets, she gives off the impression that she is sure of herself and is laid back. In contrast, the black model is pictured from the side looking toward the white model. Her back is completely hunched, making a semi-circle, which conveys the opposite image of the white model. With her hunched pose, no direct eye contact, hands behind her back, the black model is seen as weak, powerless, more of a follower while the white model is shown as a leader. Figure 4.5 portrays the facial expression of the black model as tired, while the white model looks confident. Thus, even though this campaign aired following the BLM movement, the luxury company still fails to represent the black race in an appropriate manner that would empower and relate to the brand's black consumers.

Figure 4.5: Giorgio Armani's Spring/Summer 2021 Campaign
100.1.3 4.1.3. Racial Incongruity
	Lack of representation of black models will be covered in the theme of racial incongruity. While some brands, as seen in the previous theme, attempt to be racially inclusive even if they do so in an ill-mannered way, this section will focus on luxury brands that have absolutely no racial representation in their advertisement campaigns. While the Louis Vuitton ad campaign of Spring/Summer 2020 solely featured black models which was not inclusive in terms of diversity, it still offered an insight into appropriate representation of the black race in fashion. Throughout time, the fashion industry was chiefly white dominated, which is why all black campaigns can be refreshing and eye-opening, particularly recently as a political response to BLM. Whereas an all-white representation can seem problematic in current times, because it fails to address an integral segment of society and majorly contributes to the issue of under-representation in the fashion industry. Newman (2017) found that barely 9% of the models portrayed in photographs of beauty and fashion magazines were black, and this indubitably implies campaigns as they are frequently found in those types of magazines such as Vogue, Elle, and Glamour. Such fashion magazines belonging to global media, provide advertisers with the opportunity of communicating to and reaching the target audience that shares similar consumption-related symbols (Terpstra & David, 1991). Moreover, this lack of representation stretches into the fashion runways as well, as black models solely make up a small fraction of the models who showcase the luxury brands' garments and who are involved in exclusive editorial shoots (Newman, 2017). Many years ago, lack of representation of various races in the media was not questioned, as it was the norm. However, with the rising social movements such as the BLM, and the fight for equality, lack of representation in this age is not only problematic, but impertinent. Thus, this theme will encompass all of the ad campaigns chosen for this study that were not racially inclusive. This theme will also be the weakest in its racially inclusive communication with the brands' target audiences as the management of brand equity is done through the management of brand communication (Berger, 2016). 
	Staying in line with the Greek imagery and sapphire blue tones, the Versace Eros campaign for both men and women portrays two white models. The male model is of Italian descent with a skin tone that is heavily tanned and edited as prevalent in the previous campaigns of Versace mentioned in this analysis, and the female is white with ginger hair. In one photo, they are side by side, the man on his knee, while the woman stands tall and proud. Clad in a flowy white dress with a gold belt, gold bracelet, and gold gladiator-style sandal heels, the woman is the depiction of a Greek Goddess. The male model is photographed wearing underwear and gold gladiator shoes, with a glistening body highlighting his muscled physique and portraying his immortal strength. Thus, the male model bears resemblance to a Greek God, which represents the name of the luxurious perfume being advertised. In Greek mythology, Eros is the god of love and sex, and the sculpted, oiled body of the male model reflects just that. In another photo from the Eros campaign, the male model wears nothing but a Versace robe that has a crimson red outer layer highlighting the fiery love element, and an azure blue inner layer that reflects the blue serenity of the photo. He is clutching onto a massive turquoise bottle of the perfume, as he intensely gazes into the camera. Thus, both models are portrayed in power poses, but there is no inclusion of models of color in order to portray diversity and inclusion in the campaign. The brand's Spring/Summer 2011 campaign also featured no black models and was so disconnected from reality in its model representation. The campaign featured three models, one female and two males, all of whom were white with bleached platinum blond hair. In both photos from the campaign, the male models solely wear black leather pants that create immense contrast with the paleness of their skin and the blond of their hair. The female model wears a dress in both photographs, as she stares directly into the camera while the male models look sideways. The elements in this campaign connote the power of the woman who stares right into the eyes of the viewer, while the lack of clothing on the men and the lack of eye contact make them seem inferior as the focus is on the woman. Thus, the brand achieves in portraying the figure of a strong female, it fails to represent diversity.
	Louis Vuitton has represented black models in their recent campaigns, however, their Spring/Summer 2012 campaign lacked representation. The campaign carries similarities to the brand's more progressive campaigns due to the elaborate floral elements that denote the spring and summer collections and the pastel hues of the garments. As depicted in Figure 4.6, the entire campaign is shot in a diner scene, with pastel pink silk curtains that further connote the luxurious fabrics of the brand. However, it solely features two white females who differ from one another based on their hair colors, one has black hair while the other has platinum white hair, which showcases how the brand aimed to create contrast between the two models. With the abundance of milkshakes and sundaes, all placed on either side of the models to create symmetry, add to the high-class, pin-up aesthetic that the campaign is going for. There is a symmetrical balance among the elements in the advertisement campaign, with blank/white space in the background that brings focus to the models and the pastel pink details of the setting. The models face each other, with facial expressions that signify they are mid-conversation and possibly engaged in gossip - and as viewers, we are merely spectators watching the scene unfold before us. Due to the similarity of the two models, the mirroring of each other's outfits, and the playful nature of their demeanor, the campaign reinforces the notion that fashion is uniquely exercised by solely a part of a given group (Simmel, 1997). Unfortunately, in this case, the part of a group merely reflects one race, signifying racial incongruity. Brands in the past were not as racially inclusive as they are now, following certain social media movements and more people speaking up about the issue. The images from the campaign possess explicit and implicit ideological significance, therefore operating as means of cultural domination and persuasion (Berger, 2016). Explicitly, they denote the lack of diversity within the exclusive members of society who consume luxury products, and implicitly, they connote a prejudice against individuals who do not conform to the European beauty standard. 

Figure 4.6: Louis Vuitton's Spring/Summer 2012 Campaign

	Ideologies allow for the validation and preservation of power relations, often considered to be the groupthink as they reflect what the majority believe in (Fairclough, 2013). In this theme of racial incongruity, these ideologies reflect the idea of power relations in terms of race, as the advertisement campaigns mentioned in this section do not portray any black models whatsoever, largely giving power to the white race. According to Fairclough (2013), hegemony is the driving force of ideologies, as it depicts the cultural, economic, and political domination of social groups in a given society. Giorgio Armani released a Gift campaign in 2020 for their Christmas holiday collection, which is a holiday celebrated by many members of society. Nevertheless, the campaign solely portrayed two white females and two white males, completely disregarding all other races. This was deemed problematic because of its lack of representation, especially due to the fact that it was aired months after the BLM movement took the world by storm. Shot in black and white in a heritage building, the photos of the campaign are reflective of heritage, luxury, and glamour as the men wear velour suits while the females wear sparkly gowns. Furthermore, the women stare into the camera depicting powerful female figures, while the men look to the side, which is an element seen in Versace's Spring/Summer 2011 campaign that also lacked racial representation. 
	No single ad campaign has the ability to convey the absolute truth and reflect the true reality that we live in, however, they can be used to illustrate the brand's values and beliefs, what they stand for and against (Van Dijk, 1995). As seen in the theme of equipoise of power, Chanel has been successful in depicting a balance of black and white models in their previous campaigns, even before the social movements were trending worldwide. However, their recent Cruise Campaign of  2020/2021, shot in an intimate setting of a mansion that possesses elements representative of luxury such as stone columns and a massive swimming pool, only utilized their white brand ambassador - Lily Rose Depp. While the reclusive location and the presence of one model explains that the campaign was shot during the pandemic and thus, the brand opted to do more of a low-key shoot of their cruise collection, it does not translate well as a campaign that came out post-BLM. Similar to Chanel's previous campaigns, the concept of absolute elegance and femininity is favorably emphasized through the pose of the model and the clothing featured. The iconic tweed in Figure 4.7, paired with a plethora of gold details in the chain, the belt, the bikini, and the Chanel brooch highlight the essence of the brand. The natural hair done in a French braid adds to the intimate photoshoot the brand was going for, which is also seen in the natural lighting and the rich greens of the trees and the blueness of the water in the swimming pool. Thus, while the brand triumphantly conveys the notion of elegance and luxury, its lack of representation is uncharacteristic of a luxury brand of today.

Figure 4.7: Chanel's 2021 Resort Campaign featuring Lily-Rose Depp
100.2 
100.3 4.2. Quantitative Analysis
100.3.1 4.2.1. Regression Analysis
      The first hypothesis (H1) was formed with the justification that once a person is exposed to more events of racism, then they will be more likely to identify whether an ad campaign is racially inclusive or not. Stemming from their awareness of encountering events of racism, they are more likely to make sound judgments regarding a brand's communication in terms of race. Thus, to discover whether the number of times participants have been exposed to events of racism has an influence on their perceived racism scale in regards to the ad campaigns used in the survey, a simple regression analysis was conducted. Initially, the participants' response to the number of times they experienced events of racism within the past 12 months was tested for normality in terms of skewness and kurtosis, where one response (namely the number '1200') was removed as it was considered an outlier. A simple linear regression with the participants' belief that Christian Dior's ad campaign is inclusive of race as criterion and the number of times they have been exposed to events of racism within the past 12 months as predictor was conducted. The model was found to be significant, F(1, 149) = 11.57, p = .001, R²  = .07. As a result, the number of times the participants were exposed to events of racism had a positive significant influence on their perception of the Dior campaign's racial inclusivity (b* = .27, p = .001), meaning that the hypothesis is accepted.
      A simple linear regression with the participants' belief that Chanel's ad campaign features good racial representation as criterion and impulse shoppers, which signify participants who are driven by their impulses when it comes to shopping and shop more for symbolic purposes rather than functional, as predictor was conducted. The model was found to be significant, F(1, 150) = 28.53, p < .001, R²  = .16. As a result, the type of shoppers that purchase items due to impulses and symbolic purposes had a positive significant influence on their perception of the Chanel campaign's way of representing race (b* = .40, p < .001), meaning that the second hypothesis (H2) of impulse shoppers' perceiving the ad campaigns of luxury fashion brands as having good racial representation is accepted. 
      In order to strengthen this hypothesis, the same simple linear regression analysis was conducted with the other two luxury fashion brands' depiction of good racial representation as perceived by the impulse shoppers. Once again, impulse shoppers was the criterion, while Christian Dior's ad campaign's level of racial representation was the predictor. The model was found to be significant, F(1, 150) = 10.72, p = .001, R²  = .07. Therefore, the hypothesis was accepted as respondents' impulse shopping habits had a positive significant influence on how they received Christian Dior's ad campaign in terms of racial representation (b* = .26, p = .001). 
      Louis Vuitton's representation of race in their ad campaign was also used as predictor, with impulse shoppers as criterion, in the last simple regression analysis for this hypothesis. The model was significant, F(1, 150) = 19.58, p < .001, R²  = .12. The hypothesis of impulse shoppers believing that all racial representation is good and appropriate in the ad campaigns utilized in the survey is accepted for the third time, indicating its significance (b* = .34, p < .001). 
      Similarly, another set of simple linear regression analyses were conducted to discover whether participants who responded passively upon encountering events of racism were more likely to believe that the racial representation in the ad campaigns were good or not. This was the third hypothesis (H3) formed, which assumed that participants with passive reactions towards events of racism would view representation in the campaigns as good, due to a lack of activism approach. The criterion here was the perception of Chanel's ad campaign being appropriately representative of race, with respondents who experienced passive emotions when coming across racist events as predictor. The model was significant, F(1, 150) = 8.56, p = .004, R²  = .05. The hypothesis of passive emotion portraying respondents perceiving the racial representation as good in Chanel's ad is accepted, due to the positive significance found (b* = .23, p = .004). 
      Another simple linear regression test was conducted with how respondents perceive the racial representation in Christian Dior's Spring/Summer 2021 ad campaign as criterion, and passive emotions as predictor. The model was not significant with results portraying the following, F(1, 150) = 3.26, p = .073, R²  = .02. This showcased that respondents who demonstrated passive emotions when seeing an event of racism did not have a significant influence on their perception of good racial representation in Christian Dior's campaign, (b* = .15, p = .073), rejecting the hypothesis.
      Lastly, Louis Vuitton's ad campaign was tested in terms of how respondents, who exhibited passive emotions when encountering racial events, felt about the representation of race. Consequently, the dependent variable used in this simple linear regression analysis was the perception of racial portrayal, while the independent variable was the passive emotions. The model was found to be significant, F(1, 150) = 19.63, p < .001, R²  = .12. On that account, the passive emotions experienced by participants during events of racism had a positive significant influence on how inclusive they perceived the ad campaign of Louis Vuitton to be in terms of racial representation, (b* = .34, p < .001), meaning that the hypothesis is accepted. Therefore, while the hypothesis was accepted for both Chanel and Louis Vuitton's ad campaigns, it was not accepted for Dior. As a result, following the three analyses, I cannot claim that passive emotions have a significant effect on the perception of racial inclusivity in luxury fashion ad campaigns.
      
100.3.2 4.2.1. Paired samples t-test
      While both campaigns feature models of African descent, the Louis Vuitton campaign depicted them in power stances, unwaveringly staring directly at the camera. In contrast, the Dior campaign features them in more passive roles, which is why this fourth hypothesis (H4) was formed as visually it seems that Louis Vuitton's campaign is significantly more racially inclusive and progressive. A paired samples t-test was conducted to identify whether the survey participants found Louis Vuitton's ad campaign to be more racially inclusive than Dior's. While there was a difference in the scores for Dior's campaign (M = 3.13, SD = 1.06), and Vuitton's campaign (M = 3.93, SD = 1.01)  conditions; t(151) = -9.18, p < .001. As expected, these results suggest a significant difference and prove that Louis Vuitton's ad campaign was perceived to be more racially inclusive than Dior's. Therefore, H4 is accepted and the null hypothesis is rejected.

101 

102 5. Conclusion and discussion
102.1 5.1. Conclusion
      To comprehend how luxury fashion brands communicate racial inclusivity to their consumers, 50 of their ad campaigns were analyzed and a survey was conducted with 152 respondents, where the findings portrayed that while brands may attempt to showcase racial inclusivity on the surface, the perception by consumers differs by not only what they see but through their social situations. This thesis aimed to identify the methods utilized by luxury fashion brands in their communication of racial inclusivity, and measure the consumers' perceptions of the communication. Based on a qualitative and quantitative analysis of the luxury fashion brands' advertising campaigns, it can be concluded that there is a difference in communication of racial inclusivity that depends on each brand and the perceptions vary accordingly. The qualitative analysis portrayed that the most inclusive racial representation, referring to the models of various races featured who exhibited a similar equilibrium of power, were done by luxury brands such as Louis Vuitton, Christian Dior, and Chanel. Whereas other luxury brands, such as Versace and Giorgio Armani, predominantly possessed a problematic portrayal of racial prejudice in their campaigns. Furthermore, the campaigns that ostensibly seem to be racially inclusive were put into a survey where participants were asked to rate them according to their perception of racial representation. Thus, the appropriate response to the research question would be that while brands may strive to communicate racial inclusivity in order to appeal to a wider audience range and be increasingly well perceived by their consumers, the perception is often not as well-received as expected. Particularly, the concept of veiled prejudice and tokenism plays a significant role here, as among the ad campaigns analyzed for this thesis, there were plenty that solely made a perfunctory attempt at representation in order to make it visually apparent that the brand was inclusive, however, a closer examination of the campaigns suggested that the representation was merely a symbolic effort and could be defined as problematic. 
102.2 5.2. Discussion
      The principal theory used was Stuart Hall's encoding and decoding theory, as the qualitative analysis of the ad campaigns featured a plethora of encoded messages which were decoded in this research paper through the means of intended, oppositional, and negotiated readings. The analysis portrayed that, generally, luxury fashion brands explicitly depicted exclusivity and opulence through the mise-en-scène, and attempted to depict inclusivity through models of African descent. However, the oppositional reading suggested that the depiction of models of color in certain cases reinforced the notion of tokenism, as their presence in the campaigns was symbolic. While some compromise was noted between what the luxury brands intended to communicate and what the consumers perceived, the negotiated reading, with the help of data collected from the survey, demonstrated that participants found some campaigns more inclusive than others based on personal and psychological aspects such as social status, upbringing, and cultural values. Additionally, Hall's theory enabled the discovery of the three prevailing themes in the ad campaigns, such as the equipoise of power between the races, the veiled prejudice, and the racial incongruity which represented the absolute lack of representation. Upon further analysis of these themes, there were two dominant discoveries found. While some brands improved their representation over time and showcased growth and understanding of appropriate representation such as Louis Vuitton's 2012 ad campaign versus their 2020 ad campaign, other brands remained inadequate in their representation such as Giorgio Armani. Louis Vuitton's ad campaigns proved to possess not only a balance in racial representation, but also colors and patterns that put significant emphasis on the power of racial inclusivity. The responses collected from the survey further confirmed the results of the qualitative analysis, as participants found Louis Vuitton's campaigns to be more racially inclusive than Christian Dior's despite the fact that both of the campaigns, at first glance, represented models of African descent in an equal manner, holding equal power. Furthermore, the study found that a high exposure to events of racism within the participants in the past twelve months positively influenced their perception of identifying racial inclusivity in campaigns, particularly Dior's. This conformed with the media theory used, as Hall suggested a principal correlation between individuals' social situations and the meanings they invoke from media texts (Fiske, 1992).
      The underlying messages existing in the ad campaigns were brought to light through the means of a multimodal discourse analysis. By evaluating the visual codes and texts in the ad campaigns, it was found that the notion of exclusivity and opulent lifestyles that luxury brands tend to communicate overshadowed the notion of inclusivity. The concept of buying into a dream and having the need to belong to an elite social class as proposed by Dubois and Paternault (1995) is observed in the majority of the ad campaigns studied, however the inclusivity factor is missing, diminishing the perceived relatability consumers crave to have with a brand upon purchase. Moreover, the campaigns that utilized the classicist style to further enhance their heritage and artisanship depicted more inclusivity than ones that were not in that style. Hegemonic discourse was prevalent in most ad campaigns, made increasingly evident through the notion of tokenism and lack of appropriate representation. 
      
102.3 5.3. Limitations
      While the research analyzed an extensive collection of luxury fashion brands' ad campaigns to uncover the intricacies in their racial communication and juxtaposed the findings with data obtained from survey participants regarding their perceptions on the ads, it still is not free from limitations. The study solely analyzed ad campaigns from five renowned luxury brands, when in reality, there is a large pool of other luxury brands that have dealt with the topic of racial inclusivity in a completely different way. Thus, while the ad campaigns used in this thesis did offer profound insight into how the brands communicated with their target audiences at the time that the campaigns were done, it was quite limited in terms of the variety of luxury fashion brands and the years of the ad campaigns. Additionally, although there was diversity in the ethnic backgrounds of the respondents of the survey, a majority of them were White/Caucasian, and the way they perceive racial discrimination could be different from respondents that belong to other races. The survey utilized three ad campaigns for the participants to respond to, because more images would require more time to fill out, and might have discouraged some participants from completing it fully. However, if more images were provided from ad campaigns for them to respond to, the perception of consumers in regards to racial inclusivity communicated by luxury brands would have been more extensive, and as a result, more accurate. Thus, a more expansive approach to the survey would have provided increasingly profound insight into how consumers perceive the communication.
102.4 5.4. Further Research
      Further research regarding this topic could include and study ad campaigns from several other luxury brands, especially ones that were established in the 21st century, as they would be more aware and advanced of social movements and would be more inclined to appease their consumers. The respondents of the survey would be more balanced in terms of diverse ethnic backgrounds, and they would be offered an incentive to provide their opinions and perceptions on an increased amount of ad campaigns from several luxury fashion brands. Nevertheless, this study succeeded in providing an in-depth analysis of various ad campaigns from renowned fashion brands and gathered audience perceptions on the topic. The world of fashion is ever-growing, particularly with the technological disruptions that occur on the regular, and thus, there is never a limit to what can be studied and to what extent. Future researchers should take the findings of this thesis into account as it would provide a vital foundation for them to build on their research. With more social movements taking the internet by storm, and more individuals advocating for equal rights and equal representation, there is hope that soon all brands will incorporate an equilibrium of power mentality when representing models of all races in their campaigns. There is always room to learn and to grow, especially in the luxury industry that should embrace inclusivity in their communication of exclusivity.


103 

104 6. References
Aaker, D. A. (1996). Building Strong Brands. Free Press. 
Agyekum, C. (2015). Consumer Perception of Product Quality. Scientific and Academic Publishing, 3, 25-29. https://doi.org/10.5923/j.m2economics.20150302.01 
Amatulli, C., Pino, G., Iodice, M., & Cascio, R. (2016). Linguistic and Symbolic Elements in Luxury Fashion Advertising: A Qualitative Analysis. International Journal of Business and Management, 11(9), 265. https://doi.org/10.5539/ijbm.v11n9p265 
Atkins, R. (2014). Instruments Measuring Perceived Racism/Racial Discrimination: Review and Critique of Factor Analytic Techniques. International Journal of Health Services, 44(4), 711-734. https://doi.org/10.2190/hs.44.4.c 
Bagozzi, R. P., Gopinath, M., & Nyer, P. U. (1999). The role of emotions in marketing. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 27(2), 184-206. doi:10.1177/0092070399272005
Barthes, R. (1972). Mythologies. (J. Cape, Trans.). Hill & Wang. 
Berger, A. A. (2016). Applied Discourse Analysis: Popular Culture, Media, and Everyday Life. Palgrave Macmillan. 
Berry, C. J. (1994). The Idea of Luxury: a Conceptual and Historical Investigation. Cambridge University Press.
Bian, Q., & Forsythe, S. (2012). Purchase intention for luxury brands: A cross cultural comparison. Journal of Business Research, 65(10), 1443-1451. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2011.10.010
Brewer, M. B., Gonsalkorale, K., & van Dommelen, A. (2012). Social identity complexity: Comparing majority and minority ethnic group members in a multicultural society. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 16(5), 529-544.
Campbell, R. (1991). Word vs. Image: Elitism, Popularity and TV News. Television Quarterly 26(1): 73-81.
Campbell, C. P. (2019). The Routledge Companion to Media and Race. Routledge. 
Carreon, J. (2021, March 13). Dior's Cruise 2021 Collection Is a Tribute to Italian Arts and Crafts. ELLE. https://www.elle.com/fashion/a33396611/dior-resort-cruise-2021/ 
Chadha, R., & Husband, P. (2006). The cult of the luxury brand: Inside Asia's love affair with luxury. Nicholas Brealey.
Chang, P.-L., & Chieng, M.-H. (2006). Building consumer-brand relationship: A cross-cultural experiential view. Psychology and Marketing, 23(11), 927-959. https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.20140 
Chin, M. (2018, March 26). Louis Vuitton Crowns Virgil Abloh as Its New Menswear Designer. HYPEBEAST. https://hypebeast.com/2018/3/virgil-abloh-louis-vuitton-new-menswear-designer 
Christodoulides, G., Michaelidou, N., & Li, C. H. (2009). Measuring perceived brand luxury: An evaluation of the Bli scale. Journal of Brand Management, 16(5-6), 395-405. https://doi.org/10.1057/bm.2008.49
Coker, T. (2020, July 29). How data reveals fashion's inclusivity problem. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2020/jul/29/numbers-dont-lie-how-data-reveals-fashions-inclusivity-problem 
Conway, H., & Roenisch, R. (2006). Understanding architecture: An introduction to architecture and architectural history. Routledge.
Cornelissen, J. (2007). Corporate Communications: Theory and Practice. Strategic Direction, 23(8). https://doi.org/10.1108/sd.2007.05623hae.001
Couper, M. P. (2005). Technology trends in survey data collection. Social Science Computer Review, 23(4), 486-501. https://doi.org/10.1177/0894439305278972
De Barnier, V., Falcy, S., & Valette-Florence, P. (2012). Do consumers perceive three levels of Luxury? A comparison of accessible, intermediate and inaccessible luxury brands. Journal of Brand Management, 19(7), 623-636. https://doi.org/10.1057/bm.2012.11
De Klerk, A. (2020, July 14). Kim Jones embraces diversity with Dior's first all-Black fashion show. Harper's BAZAAR. https://www.harpersbazaar.com/uk/fashion/shows-trends/a33306920/dior-menswear-ss21/ 
Dike, J. (2019, May 4). Why Virgil at Vuitton Only Begins to Combat Industry Racism. HYPEBEAST. https://hypebeast.com/2019/5/virgil-abloh-louis-vuitton-fashion-diversity-racism 
Dittmar, H. (1992). The social psychology of material possessions: To have is to be. St. Martin's Press.
Dogan, V., Ozkara, B. Y., & Dogan, M. (2018). Luxury Consumption Tendency: Conceptualization, Scale Development and Validation. Current Psychology, 39(3), 934-952. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12144-018-9813-y 
Dubois, B., & Czellar, S. (2002). Prestige Brands or Luxury Brands ? An Exploratory Inquiry on Consumer Perceptions. Cahiers de recherche, 1-10. https://archive-ouverte.unige.ch/unige:5816 
Dubois, B., & Duquesne, P. (1993). The Market for Luxury Goods: Income versus Culture. European Journal of Marketing, 27(1), 35-44. https://doi.org/10.1108/03090569310024530 
Dubois, B., & Paternault, C. (1995). Observations: Understanding the world of international luxury brands: The "dream formula." Journal of Advertising Research, 35, 69-77.
Dyer, G. (1982). Advertising as Communication (1st ed.). Routledge. 
Ekinci, S. (2020, January 14). The importance of diversity and inclusion in the luxury world. OMD. https://www.omd.com/thoughts/the-importance-of-diversity-and-inclusion-in-the-luxury-world/. 
Elliott, G. R., & Cameron, R. C. (1994). Consumer Perception of Product Quality and the Country-of-Origin. Journal of International Marketing, 2(2), 49-62. https://doi.org/10.1177/1069031x9400200204 
Esch, F. R., Langner, T., Schmitt, B. H., & Geus, P. (2006). Are brands forever? How brand knowledge and relationships affect current and future purchases. Journal of Product & Brand Management, 15(2), 98-105. https://doi.org/10.1108/10610420610658938 
Ewen, S. (2003). PR!: A social history of spin. Basic Books.
Fairclough, N. (2013). Critical discourse analysis: The critical study of language. Routledge.
Fernandez, C. (2018, December 20). What Can the Fashion Industry Do To Be More Inclusive? The Business of Fashion. https://www.businessoffashion.com/articles/news-analysis/what-can-the-fashion-industry-do-to-be-more-inclusive 
Fionda, A. M., & Moore, C. M. (2009). The anatomy of the luxury fashion brand. Journal of Brand Management, 16(5-6), 347-363. https://doi.org/10.1057/bm.2008.45 
Fiske, J. (1992). British Cultural Studies and Television. In R. C. Allen (Ed.), Channels of Discourse, Reassembled (pp. 287-326). University of North Carolina Press. 
Givhan, R. (2013, September 6). Robin Givhan: Confronting the Lack of Black Models on the Runway. The Cut. https://www.thecut.com/2013/09/givhan-confronting-the-lack-of-black-models.html. 
Glennon, M. (2017, March). Medusa in Ancient Greek Art. The MET. https://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/medu/hd_medu.htm. 
Gordon, G. (2021, March 1). The Dior Spring/Summer 2021 Campaign Is Playing Tricks on Our Eyes. Savoir Flair. https://www.savoirflair.com/fashion/535926/dior-spring-summer-2021 
Gramsci, A. (1971). Selections from the prison notebooks. (Q. Hoare & G. Nowell-Smith, Trans.). International Publishers. 
Grassi, A., & Wigley, S. (2018). Gucci Inclusivity is the New Exclusivity. International Journal of Costume and Fashion, 18(1), 1-11. https://doi.org/10.7233/ijcf.2018.18.1.001 
Grewal, R., Mehta, R., & Kardes, F. R. (2004). The Timing of Repeat Purchases of Consumer Durable Goods: The Role of Functional Bases of Consumer Attitudes. Journal of Marketing Research, 41(1), 101-115. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.41.1.101.25090 
Hacker, K. L. (1992). Book Reviews. Discourse & Society, 3(3), 378-383. https://doi.org/10.1177/0957926592003003009 
Hall, S. (1980). Encoding/Decoding. In S. Hall, D. Hobson, A. Lowe, & P. Wills (Eds.), Culture, Media, Language (pp. 128-138). Hutchinson. 
Hall, S. (1991 [1973]). Encoding, decoding. In S. During (Ed.), The Cultural Studies Reader (pp. 90-103). Routledge.
Halpern, J., & Cobb, J. (2015, August 3). The Man Who Shot Michael Brown. The New Yorker. https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/08/10/the-cop 
Han, Y. J., Nunes, J. C., & Drèze, X. (2010). Signaling Status with Luxury Goods: The Role of Brand Prominence. Journal of Marketing, 74(4), 15-30. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.74.4.15 
Hengel, L. (2016, October 12). A Style Guide To Donatella Versace. Culture Trip. https://theculturetrip.com/europe/italy/articles/a-style-guide-to-donatella-versace/ 
Hill, E., Tiefenthäler, A., Triebert, C., Jordan, D., Willis, H., & Stein, R. (2020, June 1). How George Floyd Was Killed in Police Custody. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/31/us/george-floyd-investigation.html 
Interbrand. (2020). BGB Archive. Interbrand. https://interbrand.com/best-global-brands/ 
Johnson, M. N., & McLean, E. (2020). Discourse Analysis. In A. Kobayashi (Ed.), International Encyclopedia of Human Geography (2nd ed., pp. 377-383). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-102295-5.10814-5
Kapferer, J.-N. (2006). The Two Business Cultures of Luxury Brands. In J. E. Schroeder & M. Salzer-Mörling (Eds.), Brand Culture. Routledge. 
Karaatli, G. (2015). The Purchasing Involvement Scale. Journal of Marketing Development and Competitiveness, 9(2), 72-79. 
Kassarjian, H. H. (1969). The Negro and American Advertising. Journal of Marketing Research, 6, 29-39.
Kassarjian, H. H. (1981). Low Involvement: A Second Look. In K. B. Monroe & A. Abor (Eds.), NA - Advances in Consumer Research (Vol. 8, pp. 31-34). essay, Association for Consumer Research. 
Kastanakis, M., & Balabanis, G. (2012). Bandwagon, Snob and Veblen Effects in Luxury Consumption. In D. W. Dahl, G. V. Johar, & S. M. J. van Osselaer (Eds.), Advances in Consumer Research (Vol. 38, pp. 609-611). Association for Consumer Research. 
Keane, M. J., & McMillan, Z. (2004). Above and beyond. Brand Strategy, 187, 30-40.
Kemp, S. (1998). Perceiving luxury and necessity. Journal of Economic Psychology, 19(5), 591-606. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0167-4870(98)00026-9 
Ko, E., Costello, J. P., & Taylor, C. R. (2019). What is a luxury brand? A new definition and review of the literature. Journal of Business Research, 99, 405-413. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2017.08.023 
Kohrs, K. (2021). The language of luxury fashion advertising: technology of the self and spectacle. Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management, 25(2), 257-273. https://doi.org/10.1108/jfmm-02-2020-0029 
Kotler, P., Armstrong, G., Saunders, J., & Wong, V. (2001). Principles of Marketing. Corporate Communications: An International Journal, 6(3). https://doi.org/10.1108/ccij.2001.6.3.164.1 
Krebs, I., & Lischka, J. A. (2017). Is audience engagement worth the buzz? The value of audience engagement, comment reading, and content for online news brands. Journalism, 20(6), 714-732. https://doi.org/10.1177/1464884916689277 
Lazović, V. (2012). Content Analysis of Advertisements in Different Cultures. ELOPE: English Language Overseas Perspectives and Enquiries, 9(2), 39-51. https://doi.org/10.4312/elope.9.2.39-51 
Leiss, W., Kline, S., & Jhally, S. (1986). Social communication in advertising: Persons, products & images of well-being. Methuen.
Machin, D., & Mayr, A. (2012). How to do critical discourse analysis: a multimodal approach (1st ed.). Sage. 
Marriott, H. (2021, June 1). Mexico accuses Zara and Anthropologie of cultural appropriation. The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2021/jun/01/mexico-accuses-zara-and-anthropologie-of-cultural-appropriation. 
Millar, F. (2005). Review: The Invention of Racism in Antiquity. The International History Review, 27(1), 85-89. https://www.jstor.org/stable/40110655 
Milligan, L. (2015, March 18). Rihanna On Dior: "It's A Big Deal". British Vogue. https://www.vogue.co.uk/article/rihanna-on-dior-campaign-being-the-first-black-woman 
Mulvaney, L. (2013, November 1). Is Cultural Appropriation in Fashion Offensive? - Part I. The University Times. http://www.universitytimes.ie/2013/11/is-cultural-appropriation-in-fashion-offensive-part-i/
Munshi, J. (2014). A Method for Constructing Likert Scales. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2419366 
Newman, L. S. (2017). Black Models Matter: Challenging the Racism of Aesthetics and the Facade of Inclusion in the Fashion Industry. CUNY Academic Works. https://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc_etds/2143
Nueno, J. L., & Quelch, J. A. (1998). The mass marketing of luxury. Business Horizons, 41(6), 61-68. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0007-6813(98)90023-4 
O'Gorman, J. F., & McGrath, D. E. (1998). ABC of architecture. University of Pennsylvania Press.
Ouwersloot, J., & Tudorica, A. (2001). Brand personality creation through advertising. METEOR, Maastricht University School of Business and Economics, 39, 1-25. https://doi.org/10.26481/umamet.2001039 
Pang, C., Slaton, K., & Chung, T.-L. (2019). Brand Communication Through Inclusivity: The Perspective of First-Generation Americans. International Textile and Apparel Association Annual Conference Proceedings 76(1). https://doi.org/10.31274/itaa.8422 
Persio, S. L. (2020, June 2). 'Trump Declares War On America': Europe Reacts As Black Lives Matter Protests Spread Across Continent. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/sofialottopersio/2020/06/02/trump-declares-war-on-america-europe-reacts-as-black-lives-matter-protests-spread-across-continent/?sh=10d0b82d8c64. 
Phau, I., & Prendergast, G. (2000). Consuming luxury brands: The relevance of the 'Rarity Principle.' Journal of Brand Management, 8(2), 122-138. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.bm.2540013 
Plous, S., & Neptune, D. (1997). Racial and Gender Biases in Magazine Advertising. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 21(4), 627-644. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-6402.1997.tb00135.x 
Pozzo, B. (2020). Fashion between Inspiration and Appropriation. Laws, 9(1), 5. https://doi.org/10.3390/laws9010005 
Reynolds, T. J., Gengler, C. E., & Howard, D. J. (1995). A means-end analysis of brand persuasion through advertising. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 12(3), 257-266. https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-8116(95)00025-w 
Roberts, K. (2005). Lovemarks: The future beyond brands (2nd ed.). Powerhouse Books.
Rose, G. (2007). Visual methodologies: an introduction to the interpretation of visual materials (2nd ed.). Sage Publications. 
Rubinstein, R. P. (2001). Dress codes: meanings and messages in American culture. Westview. 
Sadre-Orafai, S. (2016). Models, Measurement, and the Problem of Mediation in the New York Fashion Industry. Visual Anthropology Review, 32(2), 122-132. https://doi.org/10.1111/var.12104 
Sari, D., & Kusuma, B. (2014). Does Luxury Brand Perception Matter In Purchase Intention? A Comparison Between A Japanese Brand And A German Brand. ASEAN Marketing Journal, 6(1). https://doi.org/10.21002/amj.v6i1.3654 
Scafidi, S. (2005). Who owns culture?: appropriation and authenticity in American law. Rutgers University Press. 
Schmidt, S., Shreffler, M., Hambrick, M., & Gordon, B. (2018). An Experimental Examination of Activist Type and Effort on Brand Image and Purchase Intentions. Sport Marketing Quarterly, 27(1), 31-43. https://doi.org/10.32731/smq.271.032018.03 
Schmidt, J. B., & Spreng, R. A. (1996). A Proposed Model of External Consumer Information Search. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 24(3), 246-256. https://doi.org/10.1177/0092070396243005 
Schroeder, J. E. (2006). Critical Visual Analysis. Handbook of Qualitative Research Methods in Marketing. https://doi.org/10.4337/9781847204127.00032 
Schroeder, J. E. (2008). Brand culture: trade marks, marketing and consumption. Trade Marks and Brands, 161-176. https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511495212.008 
Schroeder, J. E., & Borgerson, J. L. (2002). Innovations in Information Technology: Insights from Italian Renaissance Art. Consumption Markets & Culture, 5(2), 153-169. https://doi.org/10.1080/1025386029001559 
Schroeder, J. E., Salzer-Mörling, M., & Askegaard, S. (2010). Brand culture. Routledge.
Schroeder, J. E., & Zwick, D. (2004). Mirrors of Masculinity: Representation and Identity in Advertising Images. Consumption Markets & Culture, 7(1), 21-52. https://doi.org/10.1080/1025386042000212383 
Sender, K., & Decherney, P. (2016). Stuart Hall lives: cultural studies in an age of digital media. Critical Studies in Media Communication, 33(5), 381-384. https://doi.org/10.1080/15295036.2016.1244725 
Sharoni, S. (2016). The Mark of a Culture: The Efficiency and Propriety of Using Trademark Law to Deter Cultural Appropriation. 2015-2016 IP Award-Winning Paper, Stanford Law School, 1-35. https://doi.https://law.stanford.edu/publications/the-mark-of-a-culture-the-efficiency-and-propriety-of-using-trademark-law-to-deter-cultural-appropriatio/ 
Sherman, L. (2009, January 13). How The Luxury Consumer Will Spend In 2009. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/2009/01/13/luxury-spending-rules-forbeslife-cx_ls_0113style.html?sh=3a08265b4eff. 
SHOWstudio. (2021, February 16). Dior's Masterful S/S 21 Campaign. SHOWstudio. https://www.showstudio.com/news/diors-masterful-ss-21-campaign
Shukla, P. (2011). Impact of interpersonal influences, brand origin and brand image on luxury purchase intentions: Measuring interfunctional interactions and a cross-national comparison. Journal of World Business, 46(2), 242-252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwb.2010.11.002 
Silhouette and Style. (2016, July 1). Giorgio Armani's New Normal Fall 2016 Campaign. SilhouetteAndStyle. https://silhouetteandstyle.com/2016/07/01/giorgio-armanis-new-normal-fall-2016-campaign/
Simmel, G. (1997). The Philosophy of Fashion. In D. Frisby & M. Featherstone (Eds.), Simmel on Culture. Sage.
Simpson, J. A., & Weiner, E. (1989). The Oxford English dictionary. Clarendon Press. 
Slama, M. E., & Tashchian, A. (1985). Selected Socioeconomic and Demographic Characteristics Associated with Purchasing Involvement. Journal of Marketing, 49(1), 72. https://doi.org/10.2307/1251177 
Snyder, M., & DeBono, K. G. (1985). Appeals to image and claims about quality: Understanding the psychology of advertising. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49(3), 586-597. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.49.3.586 
Stampler, L. (2014, August 11). #IfTheyGunnedMeDown Hashtag Responds to Michael Brown Shooting. Time. https://time.com/3100975/iftheygunnedmedown-ferguson-missouri-michael-brown/ 
Steyn, B. (2004). From strategy to corporate communication strategy: A conceptualisation. Journal of Communication Management, 8(2), 168-183. https://doi.org/10.1108/13632540410807637 
Strebinger, A., Guo, X., Klauser, F., & Grant-Hay, P. (2018). Is Multi-Ethnic Advertising a globally viable strategy for a Western luxury car brand? A mixed-method cross-cultural study. Journal of Business Research, 82, 409-416. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2017.08.037 
Terpstra, V., & David, K. H. (1991). The cultural environment of international business. South-Western Publishing Co. 
Thompson, C. E., Neville, H., Weathers, P. L., Poston, W. C., et al. (1990). Cultural mistrust and racism reaction among African-American students. Journal of College Student Development, 31(2), 162-168.
Van Dijk, T. A. (1995). Aims of Critical Discourse Analysis. Japanese Discourse, 1, 17-27.
Vigneron, F., & Johnson, L. W. (2004). Measuring perceptions of brand luxury. Journal of Brand Management, 11(6), 484-506. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.bm.2540194 
Von Wachenfeldt, P. (2019). Communicating seduction. Luxury fashion advertisements in video campaigns. Studies in Communication Sciences, 18(2). https://doi.org/10.24434/j.scoms.2018.02.010 
Wang, J., Zhu, R., & Shiv, B. (2012). The Lonely Consumer: Loner or Conformer? Journal of Consumer Research, 38(6), 1116-1128. https://doi.org/10.1086/661552 
Wilcox, K., Kim, H. M., & Sen, S. (2009). Why Do Consumers Buy Counterfeit Luxury Brands? Journal of Marketing Research, 46(2), 247-259. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkr.46.2.247 
Williamson, J. (1978). Decoding advertisements: ideology and meaning in advertising. Marion Boyers. 
Wissinger, E. (2015). This year's model: fashion, media, and the making of glamour. New York University Press. 

105 

106 7. Appendix
106.1 7.1. Chanel's Ad Campaigns
7.1.1. Spring/Summer 2012 campaign






7.1.2. Cruise Campaign 2021
















7.1.3. Spring/Summer 2019 Campaign




106.2 7.2. Christian Dior's Ad Campaigns
106.2.1 7.2.1. Resort 2021 Campaign









7.2.2. Spring/Summer 2021 Campaign



7.2.3. Homme Spring/Summer 2021 Campaign

106.2.2 7.2.5. Garden Campaign 2015



106.3 

106.4 7.3. Giorgio Armani's Ad Campaigns
7.3.1. "New Normal" Fall 2016 Campaign


7.3.2. Fall 2018 Campaign


7.3.3. Gift 2020 Campaign



7.3.4. Spring/Summer 2021 Campaign


7.3.5. Emporio Armani Fall 2020 Campaign



7.3.6. Spring/Summer 2016 Campaign




106.5 

106.6 7.4. Louis Vuitton's Ad Campaigns
7.4.1. Homme Spring/Summer 2020
106.7 





























106.8 


7.4.2. Spring/Summer 2012 Campaign
106.9 
106.10 


106.11 

106.12 7.5. Versace's Ad Campaigns
7.5.1. Eros 2012 Campaign 









































7.5.2. Spring/Summer 2013 Campaign

7.5.3. Spring/Summer 2011 Campaign
106.13 

7.5.4. Spring/Summer 2021 Campaign
106.14 




106.15 7.6. Survey
106.16 
106.17 












1 www.netflix.com
2 www.primevideo.com 
3 www.hulu.com
4 www.videoland.com
5 www.disneyplus.com 
6 www.youtube.com 
7 www.vimeo.com 
8 https://www.imdb.com/ 
9 https://www.reddit.com/r/netflix/
10 https://www.reddit.com/r/SampleSize/
11 https://www.facebook.com/groups/613870175328566 
12 'To what extent does the exposure to a harmful idea through internet memes influence the later acceptance of that same idea as normal, in different formats?'
13 "(of an image, video, piece of information, etc.) circulated rapidly and widely from one internet user to another: a viral ad campaign; the video went viral and was seen by millions." Viral, Oxford English Dictionary.
14 'laugh out loud'
15 To what extent does high internet meme literacy protect viewers from accepting a harmful idea as normal, if initially exposed to it through internet memes?
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------




2












2


